
I believe that few of us would care to live in a society where every aspect of life was regulated by a single source of law, whether that source be this Court or some other organ of our complex body politic. But today’s decision certainly moves us in that direction. By parsing the New York scheme and holding one narrow provision unconstitutional, the majority invites further federal-court intrusion into every facet of state family law. If ever there were an area in which federal courts should heed the admonition of Justice Holmes that “a page of history is worth a volume of logic,”1 it is in the area of domestic relations. This area has been left to the States from **1404 time immemorial, and not without good reason.
 
Equally as troubling is the majority’s due process analysis. The Fourteenth Amendment guarantees that a State will treat individuals with “fundamental fairness” whenever its actions infringe their protected liberty or property interests. By adoption of the procedures relevant to this case, New *771 York has created an exhaustive program to assist parents in regaining the custody of their children and to protect parents from the unfair deprivation of their parental rights. And yet the majority’s myopic scrutiny of the standard of proof blinds it to the very considerations and procedures which make the New York scheme “fundamentally fair.”
 

I
State intervention in domestic relations has always been an unhappy but necessary feature of life in our organized society. For all of our experience in this area, we have found no fully satisfactory solutions to the painful problem of child abuse and neglect. We have found, however, that leaving the States free to experiment with various remedies has produced novel approaches and promising progress.
 
Throughout this experience the Court has scrupulously refrained from interfering with state answers to domestic relations questions. “Both theory and the precedents of this Court teach us solicitude for state interests, particularly in the field of family and family-property arrangements.”  United States v. Yazell, 382 U.S. 341, 352, 86 S.Ct. 500, 507, 15 L.Ed.2d 404 (1966). This is not to say that the Court should blink at clear constitutional violations in state statutes, but rather that in this area, of all areas, “substantial weight must be given to the good-faith judgments of the individuals [administering a program] ... that the procedures they have provided assure fair consideration of the ... claims of individuals.”  Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 349, 96 S.Ct. 893, 909, 47 L.Ed.2d 18 (1976).
 
This case presents a classic occasion for such solicitude. As will be seen more fully in the next part, New York has enacted a comprehensive plan to aid marginal parents in regaining the custody of their child. The central purpose of the New York plan is to reunite divided families. Adoption of the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard represents New York’s good-faith effort to balance the interest of parents *772 against the legitimate interests of the child and the State. These earnest efforts by state officials should be given weight in the Court’s application of due process principles. “Great constitutional provisions must be administered with caution. Some play must be allowed for the joints of the machine, and it must be remembered that legislatures are ultimate guardians of the liberties and welfare of the people in quite as great a degree as the courts.” Missouri, K. & T.R. Co. v. May, 194 U.S. 267, 270, 24 S.Ct. 638, 639, 48 L.Ed. 971 (1904).2
 
The majority may believe that it is adopting a relatively unobtrusive means of ensuring that termination proceedings provide “due process of law.” In fact, however, **1405 fixing the standard of proof as a matter of federal constitutional law will only lead to further federal-court intervention in state schemes. By holding that due process requires proof by clear and convincing evidence the majority surely cannot mean that any state scheme passes constitutional muster so long as it applies that standard of proof. A state law permitting termination of parental rights upon a showing of neglect by clear and convincing evidence certainly would not be acceptable *773 to the majority if it provided no procedures other than one 30-minute hearing. Similarly, the majority probably would balk at a state scheme that permitted termination of parental rights on a clear and convincing showing merely that such action would be in the best interests of the child. See Smith v. Organization of Foster Families, 431 U.S. 816, 862–863, 97 S.Ct. 2094, 2119, 53 L.Ed.2d 14 (1977) (Stewart, J., concurring in judgment).
 
After fixing the standard of proof, therefore, the majority will be forced to evaluate other aspects of termination proceedings with reference to that point. Having in this case abandoned evaluation of the overall effect of a scheme, and with it the possibility of finding that strict substantive standards or special procedures compensate for a lower burden of proof, the majority’s approach will inevitably lead to the federalization of family law. Such a trend will only thwart state searches for better solutions in an area where this Court should encourage state experimentation. “It is one of the happy incidents of the federal system that a single courageous State may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the country. This Court has the power to prevent an experiment.” New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262, 311, 52 S.Ct. 371, 386, 76 L.Ed. 747 (1932) (Brandeis, J., dissenting). It should not do so in the absence of a clear constitutional violation. As will be seen in the next part, no clear constitutional violation has occurred in this case.
 

II
As the majority opinion notes, petitioners are the parents of five children, three of whom were removed from petitioners’ care on or before August 22, 1974. During the next four and one-half years, those three children were in the custody of the State and in the care of foster homes or institutions, and the State was diligently engaged in efforts to prepare petitioners for the children’s return. Those efforts were unsuccessful, *774 however, and on April 10, 1979, the New York Family Court for Ulster County terminated petitioners’ parental rights as to the three children removed in 1974 or earlier. This termination was preceded by a judicial finding that petitioners had failed to plan for the return and future of their children, a statutory category of permanent neglect. Petitioners now contend, and the Court today holds, that they were denied due process of law, not because of a general inadequacy of procedural protections, but simply because the finding of permanent neglect was made on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence adduced at the termination hearing.
 
It is well settled that “[t]he requirements of procedural due process apply only to the deprivation of interests encompassed by the Fourteenth Amendment’s protection of liberty and property.” Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 569, 92 S.Ct. 2701, 2705, 33 L.Ed.2d 548 (1972). In determining whether such liberty or property interests are implicated by a particular government action, “we must look not to the ‘weight’ but to the nature of the interest at stake.” Id., at 571, 92 S.Ct., at 2706 (emphasis in original). I do not disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the interest of parents in their relationship with their children is sufficiently fundamental to come within the finite class of liberty interests protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. See Smith v. Organization of Foster Families, supra, at 862–863, 97 S.Ct., at 2119 (Stewart, J., concurring in judgment). “Once it is determined that due **1406 process applies, [however,] the question remains what process is due.” Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 481, 92 S.Ct. 2595, 2600, 33 L.Ed.2d 484 (1972). It is the majority’s answer to this question with which I disagree.
 

A
Due process of law is a flexible constitutional principle. The requirements which it imposes upon governmental actions vary with the situations to which it applies. As the Court previously has recognized, “not all situations calling for *775 procedural safeguards call for the same kind of procedure.” Morrissey v. Brewer, supra, at 481, 92 S.Ct., at 2600. See also Greenholtz v. Nebraska Penal Inmates, 442 U.S. 1, 12, 99 S.Ct. 2100, 2106, 60 L.Ed.2d 668 (1979); Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S., at 334, 96 S.Ct., at 902; Cafeteria Workers v. McElroy, 367 U.S. 886, 895, 81 S.Ct. 1743, 1748, 6 L.Ed.2d 1230 (1961). The adequacy of a scheme of procedural protections cannot, therefore, be determined merely by the application of general principles unrelated to the peculiarities of the case at hand.
 
Given this flexibility, it is obvious that a proper due process inquiry cannot be made by focusing upon one narrow provision of the challenged statutory scheme. Such a focus threatens to overlook factors which may introduce constitutionally adequate protections into a particular government action. Courts must examine all procedural protections offered by the State, and must assess the cumulative effect of such safeguards. As we have stated before, courts must consider “the fairness and reliability of the existing ... procedures” before holding that the Constitution requires more. Mathews v. Eldridge, supra, 424 U.S., at 343, 96 S.Ct., at 907. Only through such a broad inquiry may courts determine whether a challenged governmental action satisfies the due process requirement of “fundamental fairness.”3 In some instances, the Court has even looked to nonprocedural restraints on official action in determining whether the deprivation of a protected interest was effected without due process of law. E.g.,  *776 Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651, 97 S.Ct. 1401, 51 L.Ed.2d 711 (1977). In this case, it is just such a broad look at the New York scheme which reveals its fundamental fairness.4
 
The termination of parental rights on the basis of permanent neglect can occur under New York law only by order of the Family Court. N.Y.Soc.Serv.Law (SSL) § 384–b.3.(d) (McKinney Supp.1981–1982). Before a petition for permanent termination can be filed in that court, however, several other events must first occur.
 
**1407 The Family Court has jurisdiction only over those children who are in the care of an authorized agency. N.Y.Family Court Act (FCA) § 614.1. (b) (McKinney 1975 and Supp.1981–1982). Therefore, the children who are the subject of a termination petition must previously have been removed from their parents’ home on a temporary basis. Temporary removal of a child can occur in one of two ways. The parents may consent to the removal, FCA § 1021, or, as occurred in this case, the Family Court can order the removal pursuant to a finding that the child is abused or neglected.5 FCA §§ 1051, 1052.
 
*777 Court proceedings to order the temporary removal of a child are initiated by a petition alleging abuse or neglect, filed by a state-authorized child protection agency or by a person designated by the court. FCA §§ 1031, 1032. Unless the court finds that exigent circumstances require removal of the child before a petition may be filed and a hearing held, see FCA § 1022, the order of temporary removal results from a “dispositional hearing” conducted to determine the appropriate form of alternative care. FCA § 1045. See also FCA § 1055. This “dispositional hearing” can be held only after the court, at a separate “fact-finding hearing,” has found the child to be abused or neglected within the specific statutory definition of those terms. FCA §§ 1012, 1044, 1051.
Parents subjected to temporary removal proceedings are provided extensive procedural protections. A summons and copy of the temporary removal petition must be served upon the parents within two days of issuance by the court, FCA §§ 1035, 1036, and the parents may, at their own request, delay the commencement of the factfinding hearing for three days after service of the summons. FCA § 1048.6 The factfinding hearing may not commence without a determination by the court that the parents are present at the hearing and have been served with the petition. FCA § 1041. At the hearing itself, “only competent, material and relevant evidence may be admitted,” with some enumerated exceptions *778 for particularly probative evidence. FCA § 1046(b)(ii). In addition, indigent parents are provided with an attorney to represent them at both the factfinding and dispositional hearings, as well as at all other proceedings related to temporary removal of their child. FCA § 262(a)(i).
 
An order of temporary removal must be reviewed every 18 months by the Family Court. SSL § 392.2. Such review is conducted by hearing before the same judge who ordered the temporary removal, and a notice of the hearing, including a statement of the dispositional alternatives, must be given to the parents at least 20 days before the hearing is held. SSL § 392.4. As in the initial removal action, the parents must be parties to the proceedings, ibid., and are entitled to court-appointed counsel if indigent. FCA § 262(a).
 
One or more years after a child has been removed temporarily from the parents’ home, permanent termination proceedings may be commenced by the filing of a petition in the court which ordered the temporary removal. The petition must be filed by a state agency or by a foster parent authorized by the court, SSL § 384–b.3.(b), and must allege that the child has been **1408 permanently neglected by the parents. SSL §§ 384–b.3.(d).7 Notice of the petition and the dispositional proceedings must be served upon the parents at least 20 days before the commencement of the hearing, SSL § 384–b.3.(e), must inform them of the potential consequences of the hearing, ibid., and must inform them “of their right to the assistance of counsel, including [their] right ... to have counsel assigned by the court [if] they are financially unable to obtain counsel.” Ibid. See also FCA § 262.
 
As in the initial removal proceedings, two hearings are held in consideration of the permanent termination petition. *779 SSL § 384–b.3.(f). At the factfinding hearing, the court must determine, by a fair preponderance of the evidence, whether the child has been permanently neglected. SSL § 384–b.3.(g). “Only competent, material and relevant evidence may be admitted in a fact-finding hearing.” FCA § 624. The court may find permanent neglect if the child is in the care of an authorized agency or foster home and the parents have “failed for a period of more than one year ... substantially and continuously or repeatedly to maintain contact with or plan for the future of the child, although physically and financially able to do so.” SSL 384–b.7.(a).8 In addition, because the State considers its “first obligation” to be the reuniting of the child with its natural parents, SSL § 384–b.1.(iii), the court must also find that the supervising state agency has, without success, made “diligent efforts to encourage and strengthen the parental relationship.” SSL § 384–b.7.(a) (emphasis added).9
 
*780 Following the factfinding hearing, a separate, dispositional hearing is held to determine what course of action would be in “the best interests of the child.” FCA § 631. A finding of permanent neglect at the fact-finding hearing, although necessary to a termination of parental rights, does not control the court’s order at the dispositional hearing. The court may dismiss the petition, suspend judgment on the petition and retain jurisdiction for a period of one year in order to provide further opportunity for a reuniting of the family, or terminate the parents’ right to the custody and care of the child. FCA §§ 631–634. The court must base its decision solely upon the record of “material and relevant evidence” introduced at the dispositional **1409 hearing, FCA § 624; In re “Female” M., 70 A.D.2d 812, 417 N.Y.S.2d 482 (1979), and may not entertain any presumption that the best interests of the child “will be promoted by any particular disposition.” FCA § 631.
As petitioners did in this case, parents may appeal any unfavorable decision to the Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court. Thereafter, review may be sought in the New York Court of Appeals and, ultimately, in this Court if a federal question is properly presented.
 
As this description of New York’s termination procedures demonstrates, the State seeks not only to protect the interests of parents in rearing their own children, but also to assist and encourage parents who have lost custody of their children to reassume their rightful role. Fully understood, the New York system is a comprehensive program to aid parents such as petitioners. Only as a last resort, when “diligent efforts” to reunite the family have failed, does New *781 York authorize the termination of parental rights. The procedures for termination of those relationships which cannot be aided and which threaten permanent injury to the child, administered by a judge who has supervised the case from the first temporary removal through the final termination, cannot be viewed as fundamentally unfair. The facts of this case demonstrate the fairness of the system.
 
The three children to which this case relates were removed from petitioners’ custody in 1973 and 1974, before petitioners’ other two children were born. The removals were made pursuant to the procedures detailed above and in response to what can only be described as shockingly abusive treatment.10 At the temporary removal hearing held before the Family Court on September 30, 1974, petitioners were represented by counsel, and allowed the Ulster County Department of Social Services (Department) to take custody of the three children.
 
Temporary removal of the children was continued at an evidentiary hearing held before the Family Court in December 1975, after which the court issued a written opinion concluding that petitioners were unable to resume their parental responsibilities due to personality disorders. Unsatisfied with the progress petitioners were making, the court also directed *782 the Department to reduce to writing the plan which it had designed to solve the problems at petitioners’ home and reunite the family.
 
A plan for providing petitioners with extensive counseling and training services was submitted to the court and approved in February 1976. Under the plan, petitioners received training by a mother’s aide, a nutritional aide, and a public health nurse, and counseling at a family planning clinic. In addition, the plan provided psychiatric treatment and vocational training for the father, and counseling at a family service center for the mother. Brief for Respondent Kramer 1–7. Between early 1976 and the final termination decision in April 1979, the State spent more than $15,000 in these efforts to rehabilitate petitioners as parents. App. 34.
 
Petitioners’ response to the State’s effort was marginal at best. They wholly disregarded some of the available services and participated only sporadically in the others. **1410 As a result, and out of growing concern over the length of the children’s stay in foster care, the Department petitioned in September 1976 for permanent termination of petitioners’ parental rights so that the children could be adopted by other families. Although the Family Court recognized that petitioners’ reaction to the State’s efforts was generally “non-responsive, even hostile,” the fact that they were “at least superficially cooperative” led it to conclude that there was yet hope of further improvement and an eventual reuniting of the family. Exhibit to Brief for Respondent Kramer 618. Accordingly, the petition for permanent termination was dismissed.
 
Whatever progress petitioners were making prior to the 1976 termination hearing, they made little or no progress thereafter. In October 1978, the Department again filed a termination petition alleging that petitioners had completely failed to plan for the children’s future despite the considerable efforts rendered in their behalf. This time, the Family Court agreed. The court found that petitioners had “failed in any meaningful way to take advantage of the many social *783 and rehabilitative services that have not only been made available to them but have been diligently urged upon them.” App. 35. In addition, the court found that the “infrequent” visits “between the parents and their children were at best superficial and devoid of any real emotional content.” Id., at 21. The court thus found “nothing in the situation which holds out any hope that [petitioners] may ever become financially self sufficient or emotionally mature enough to be independent of the services of social agencies. More than a reasonable amount of time has passed and still, in the words of the case workers, there has been no discernible forward movement. At some point in time, it must be said, ‘enough is enough.’ ” Id., at 36.
 
In accordance with the statutory requirements set forth above, the court found that petitioners’ failure to plan for the future of their children, who were then seven, five, and four years old and had been out of petitioners’ custody for at least four years, rose to the level of permanent neglect. At a subsequent dispositional hearing, the court terminated petitioners’ parental rights, thereby freeing the three children for adoption.
 
As this account demonstrates, the State’s extraordinary 4-year effort to reunite petitioners’ family was not just unsuccessful, it was altogether rebuffed by parents unwilling to improve their circumstances sufficiently to permit a return of their children. At every step of this protracted process petitioners were accorded those procedures and protections which traditionally have been required by due process of law. Moreover, from the beginning to the end of this sad story all judicial determinations were made by one Family Court Judge. After four and one-half years of involvement with petitioners, more than seven complete hearings, and additional periodic supervision of the State’s rehabilitative efforts, the judge no doubt was intimately familiar with this case and the prospects for petitioners’ rehabilitation.
 
It is inconceivable to me that these procedures were “fundamentally unfair” to petitioners. Only by its obsessive *784 focus on the standard of proof and its almost complete disregard of the facts of this case does the majority find otherwise.11 As the discussion **1411 above indicates, however, such a *785 focus does not comport with the flexible standard of fundamental fairness embodied in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
 

B
In addition to the basic fairness of the process afforded petitioners, the standard of proof chosen by New York clearly reflects a constitutionally permissible balance of the interests at stake in this case. The standard of proof “represents an attempt to instruct the factfinder concerning the degree of confidence our society thinks he should have in the correctness of factual conclusions for a particular type of adjudication.” In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 370, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 1076, 25 L.Ed.2d 368 (1970) (Harlan, J. concurring); Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 423, 99 S.Ct. 1804, 1807, 60 L.Ed.2d 323 (1979). In this respect, the standard of proof is a crucial component of legal process, the primary function of which is “to minimize the risk of erroneous decisions.”12 *786 Greenholtz v. Nebraska Penal Inmates, 442 U.S., at 13, 99 S.Ct., at 2106. See also Addington v. Texas, supra, at 425, 99 S.Ct., at 1808–1809; Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S., at 344, 96 S.Ct., at 907.
 
**1412 In determining the propriety of a particular standard of proof in a given case, however, it is not enough simply to say that we are trying to minimize the risk of error. Because errors in factfinding affect more than one interest, we try to minimize error as to those interests which we consider to be most important. As Justice Harlan explained in his well-known concurrence to In re Winship:
“In a lawsuit between two parties, a factual error can make a difference in one of two ways. First, it can result in a judgment in favor of the plaintiff when the true facts warrant a judgment for the defendant. The analogue in a criminal case would be the conviction of an innocent man. On the other hand, an erroneous factual determination can result in a judgment for the defendant when the true facts justify a judgment in plaintiff’s favor. The criminal analogue would be the acquittal of a guilty man.
The standard of proof influences the relative frequency of these two types of erroneous outcomes. If, for example, the standard of proof for a criminal trial were a preponderance of the evidence rather than proof *787 beyond a reasonable doubt, there would be a smaller risk of factual errors that result in freeing guilty persons, but a far greater risk of factual errors that result in convicting the innocent. Because the standard of proof affects the comparative frequency of these two types of erroneous outcomes, the choice of the standard to be applied in a particular kind of litigation should, in a rational world, reflect an assessment of the comparative social disutility of each.” 397 U.S., at 370–371, 90 S.Ct., at 1076.
 
When the standard of proof is understood as reflecting such an assessment, an examination of the interests at stake in a particular case becomes essential to determining the propriety of the specified standard of proof. Because proof by a preponderance of the evidence requires that “[t]he litigants ... share the risk of error in a roughly equal fashion,” Addington v. Texas, supra, at 423, 99 S.Ct., at 1808, it rationally should be applied only when the interests at stake are of roughly equal societal importance. The interests at stake in this case demonstrate that New York has selected a constitutionally permissible standard of proof.
 
On one side is the interest of parents in a continuation of the family unit and the raising of their own children. The importance of this interest cannot easily be overstated. Few consequences of judicial action are so grave as the severance of natural family ties. Even the convict committed to prison and thereby deprived of his physical liberty often retains the love and support of family members. “This Court’s decisions have by now made plain beyond the need for multiple citation that a parent’s desire for and right to ‘the companionship, care, custody, and management of his or her children’ is an important interest that ‘undeniably warrants deference and, absent a powerful countervailing interest, protection.’ Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 651 [92 S.Ct. 1208, 1212, 31 L.Ed.2d 551].” Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18, 27, 101 S.Ct. 2153, 2161, 68 L.Ed.2d 640 (1981). In creating the scheme at issue in this case, the New York Legislature *788 was expressly aware of this right of parents “to bring up their own children.” SSL § 384–b.1.(a)(ii).
 
On the other side of the termination proceeding are the often countervailing interests of the child.13 A stable, loving *789 homelife **1413 is essential to a child’s physical, emotional, and spiritual well-being. It requires no citation of authority to assert that children who are abused in their youth generally face extraordinary problems developing into responsible, productive citizens. The same can be said of children who, though not physically or emotionally abused, are passed from one foster home to another with no constancy of love, trust, or discipline. If the Family Court makes an incorrect factual determination resulting in a failure to terminate a parent-child relationship which rightfully should be ended, the child involved must return either to an abusive home14 or to the often unstable world of foster care.15 The reality of these *790 risks is magnified by the fact that the only families faced with termination actions are those which have voluntarily surrendered custody of their child to the State, or, as in this case, those from which the child has been removed by judicial action because of threatened irreparable injury through **1414 abuse or neglect. Permanent neglect findings also occur only in families where the child has been in foster care for at least one year.
 
In addition to the child’s interest in a normal homelife, “the State has an urgent interest in the welfare of the child.” Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S., at 27, 101 S.Ct., at 2160.16 Few could doubt that the most valuable resource of a self-governing society is its population of children who will one day become adults and themselves assume the responsibility of self-governance. “A democratic society rests, for its continuance, upon the healthy, well-rounded growth of young people into full maturity as citizens, with all that implies.” Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 168, 64 S.Ct. 438, 443, 88 L.Ed. 645 (1944). Thus, “the whole community” has an interest “that children be both safeguarded from abuses and given opportunities for growth into free and independent well-developed ... citizens.” Id., at 165, 64 S.Ct., at 442. See also Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U.S. 629, 640–641, 88 S.Ct. 1274, 1281–82, 20 L.Ed.2d 195 (1968).
 
When, in the context of a permanent neglect termination proceeding, the interests of the child and the State in a stable, *791 nurturing homelife are balanced against the interests of the parents in the rearing of their child, it cannot be said that either set of interests is so clearly paramount as to require that the risk of error be allocated to one side or the other. Accordingly, a State constitutionally may conclude that the risk of error should be borne in roughly equal fashion by use of the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard of proof. See Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S., at 423, 99 S.Ct., at 1807–1808. This is precisely the balance which has been struck by the New York Legislature: “It is the intent of the legislature in enacting this section to provide procedures not only assuring that the rights of the natural parent are protected, but also, where positive, nurturing parent-child relationships no longer exist, furthering the best interests, needs, and rights of the child by terminating the parental rights and freeing the child for adoption.” SSL § 384–b.1.(b).
 

III
For the reasons heretofore stated, I believe that the Court today errs in concluding that the New York standard of proof in parental-rights termination proceedings violates due process of law. The decision disregards New York’s earnest efforts to aid parents in regaining the custody of their children and a host of procedural protections placed around parental rights and interests. The Court finds a constitutional violation only by a tunnel-vision application of due process principles that altogether loses sight of the unmistakable fairness of the New York procedure.
 
Even more worrisome, today’s decision cavalierly rejects the considered judgment of the New York Legislature in an area traditionally entrusted to state care. The Court thereby begins, I fear, a trend of federal intervention in state family law matters which surely will stifle creative responses to vexing problems. Accordingly, I dissent.
 


1
New York Trust Co. v. Eisner, 256 U.S. 345, 349, 41 S.Ct. 506, 507, 65 L.Ed. 963 (1921).
2
The majority asserts that “the degree of proof required in a particular type of proceeding ‘is the kind of question which has traditionally been left to the judiciary to resolve.’ Woodby v. INS, 385 U.S. 276, 284, 87 S.Ct. 483, 487, 17 L.Ed.2d 362 (1966).” Ante, at 1395. To the extent that the majority seeks, by this statement, to place upon the federal judiciary the primary responsibility for deciding the appropriate standard of proof in state matters, it arrogates to itself a responsibility wholly at odds with the allocation of authority in our federalist system and wholly unsupported by the prior decisions of this Court. In Woodby v. INS, 385 U.S. 276, 87 S.Ct. 483, 17 L.Ed.2d 362 (1966), the Court determined the proper standard of proof to be applied under a federal statute, and did so only after concluding that “Congress ha [d] not addressed itself to the question of what degree of proof [was] required in deportation proceedings.” Id., at 284, 87 S.Ct., at 487. Beyond an examination for the constitutional minimum of “fundamental fairness”—which clearly is satisfied by the New York procedures at issue in this case—this Court simply has no role in establishing the standards of proof that States must follow in the various judicial proceedings they afford to their citizens.
3
Although, as the majority states, we have held that the minimum requirements of procedural due process are a question of federal law, such a holding does not mean that the procedural protections afforded by a State will be inadequate under the Fourteenth Amendment. It means simply that the adequacy of the state-provided process is to be judged by constitutional standards—standards which the majority itself equates to “fundamental fairness.” Ante, at 1394. I differ, therefore, not with the majority's statement that the requirements of due process present a federal question, but with its apparent assumption that the presence of “fundamental fairness” can be ascertained by an examination which completely disregards the plethora of protective procedures accorded parents by New York law.
4
The majority refuses to consider New York's procedure as a whole, stating that “[t]he statutory provision of right to counsel and multiple hearings before termination cannot suffice to protect a natural parent's fundamental liberty interests if the State is willing to tolerate undue uncertainty in the determination of the dispositive facts.” Ante, at 1396, n. 9. Implicit in this statement is the conclusion that the risk of error may be reduced to constitutionally tolerable levels only by raising the standard of proof—that other procedures can never eliminate “undue uncertainty” so long as the standard of proof remains too low. Aside from begging the question of whether the risks of error tolerated by the State in this case are “undue,” see infra, at 1410–1414, this conclusion denies the flexibility that we have long recognized in the principle of due process; understates the error-reducing power of procedural protections such as the right to counsel, evidentiary hearings, rules of evidence, and appellate review; and establishes the standard of proof as the sine qua non of procedural due process.
5
An abused child is one who has been subjected to intentional physical injury “which causes or creates a substantial risk of death, or serious or protracted disfigurement, or protracted impairment of physical or emotional health or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily organ.” FCA § 1012(e)(i). Sexual offenses against a child are also covered by this category. A neglected child is one “whose physical, mental or emotional condition has been impaired or is in imminent danger of becoming impaired as a result of the failure of his parent ... to exercise a minimum degree of care in supplying the child with adequate food, clothing, shelter or education.” FCA § 1012(f)(i)(A).
6
The relatively short time between notice and commencement of hearing provided by § 1048 undoubtedly reflects the State's desire to protect the child. These proceedings are designed to permit prompt action by the court when the child is threatened with imminent and serious physical, mental, or emotional harm.
7
Permanent custody also may be awarded by the Family Court if both parents are deceased, the parents abandoned the child at least six months prior to the termination proceedings, or the parents are unable to provide proper and adequate care by reason of mental illness or mental retardation. SSL § 384–b.4.(c).
8
As to maintaining contact with the child, New York law provides that “evidence of insubstantial or infrequent contacts by a parent with his or her child shall not, of itself, be sufficient as a matter of law to preclude a determination that such child is a permanently neglected child. A visit or communication by a parent with the child which is of such a character as to overtly demonstrate a lack of affectionate and concerned parenthood shall not be deemed a substantial contact.” SSL § 384–b.7.(b).
Failure to plan for the future of the child means failure “to take such steps as may be necessary to provide an adequate, stable home and parental care for the child within a period of time which is reasonable under the financial circumstances available to the parent. The plan must be realistic and feasible, and good faith effort shall not, of itself, be determinative. In determining whether a parent has planned for the future of the child, the court may consider the failure of the parent to utilize medical, psychiatric, psychological and other social and rehabilitative services and material resources made available to such parent.” SSL § 384–b.7.(c).
9
“Diligent efforts” are defined under New York law to “mean reasonable attempts by an authorized agency to assist, develop and encourage a meaningful relationship between the parent and child, including but not limited to:
“(1) consultation and cooperation with the parents in developing a plan for appropriate services to the child and his family;
“(2) making suitable arrangements for the parents to visit the child;
“(3) provision of services and other assistance to the parents so that problems preventing the discharge of the child from care may be resolved or ameliorated; and
“(4) informing the parents at appropriate intervals of the child's progress, development and health.” SSL § 384–b.7.(f).
10
Tina Apel, the oldest of petitioners' five children, was removed from their custody by court order in November 1973 when she was two years old. Removal proceedings were commenced in response to complaints by neighbors and reports from a local hospital that Tina had suffered injuries in petitioners' home including a fractured left femur, treated with a home-made splint; bruises on the upper arms, forehead, flank, and spine; and abrasions of the upper leg. The following summer John Santosky III, petitioners' second oldest child, was also removed from petitioner's custody. John, who was less than one year old at the time, was admitted to the hospital suffering malnutrition, bruises on the eye and forehead, cuts on the foot, blisters on the hand, and multiple pin pricks on the back. Exhibit to Brief for Respondent Kramer 1–5. Jed Santosky, the third oldest of petitioners' children, was removed from his parents' custody when only three days old as a result of the abusive treatment of the two older children.
11
The majority finds, without any reference to the facts of this case, that “numerous factors [in New York termination proceedings] combine to magnify the risk of erroneous factfinding.” Ante, at 1399. Among the factors identified by the majority are the “unusual discretion” of the Family Court Judge “to underweigh probative facts that might favor the parent”; the often uneducated, minority status of the parents and their consequent “vulnerab[ility] to judgments based on cultural or class bias”; the “State's ability to assemble its case,” which “dwarfs the parents' ability to mount a defense” by including an unlimited budget, expert attorneys, and “full access to all public records concerning the family”; and the fact that “natural parents have no ‘double jeopardy’ defense against repeated state” efforts, “with more or better evidence,” to terminate parental rights “even when the parents have attained the level of fitness required by the State.” Ante, at 1399–1400. In short, the majority characterizes the State as a wealthy and powerful bully bent on taking children away from defenseless parents. See ante, at 1398–1400. Such characterization finds no support in the record.
The intent of New York has been stated with eminent clarity: “the [S]tate's first obligation is to help the family with services to prevent its break-up or to reunite it if the child has already left home.” SSL § 384–b.1.(a)(iii) (emphasis added). There is simply no basis in fact for believing, as the majority does, that the State does not mean what it says; indeed, the facts of this case demonstrate that New York has gone the extra mile in seeking to effectuate its declared purpose. See supra, at 1397–1398. More importantly, there should be no room in the jurisprudence of this Court for decisions based on unsupported, inaccurate assumptions.
A brief examination of the “factors” relied upon by the majority demonstrates its error. The “unusual” discretion of the Family Court Judge to consider the “ ‘affectio[n] and concer[n]’ ” displayed by parents during visits with their children, ante, at 1398, n. 12, is nothing more than discretion to consider reality; there is not one shred of evidence in this case suggesting that the determination of the Family Court was “based on cultural or class bias”; if parents lack the “ability to mount a defense,” the State provides them with the full services of an attorney, FCA § 262, and they, like the State, have “full access to all public records concerning the family” (emphasis added); and the absence of “double jeopardy” protection simply recognizes the fact that family problems are often ongoing and may in the future warrant action that currently is unnecessary. In this case the Family Court dismissed the first termination petition because it desired to give petitioners “the benefit of the doubt,” Exhibit to Brief for Respondent Kramer 620, and a second opportunity to raise themselves to “an acceptable minimal level of competency as parents.” Id., at 624. It was their complete failure to do so that prompted the second, successful termination petition. See supra, at 1408–1409 and this page.
12
It is worth noting that the significance of the standard of proof in New York parental termination proceedings differs from the significance of the standard in other forms of litigation. In the usual adjudicatory setting, the factfinder has had little or no prior exposure to the facts of the case. His only knowledge of those facts comes from the evidence adduced at trial, and he renders his findings solely upon the basis of that evidence. Thus, normally, the standard of proof is a crucial factor in the final outcome of the case, for it is the scale upon which the factfinder weighs his knowledge and makes his decision.
Although the standard serves the same function in New York parental termination proceedings, additional assurances of accuracy are present in its application. As was adduced at oral argument, the practice in New York is to assign one judge to supervise a case from the initial temporary removal of the child to the final termination of parental rights. Therefore, as discussed above, the factfinder is intimately familiar with the case before the termination proceedings ever begin. Indeed, as in this case, he often will have been closely involved in protracted efforts to rehabilitate the parents. Even if a change in judges occurs, the Family Court retains jurisdiction of the case and the newly assigned judge may take judicial notice of all prior proceedings. Given this familiarity with the case, and the necessarily lengthy efforts which must precede a termination action in New York, decisions in termination cases are made by judges steeped in the background of the case and peculiarly able to judge the accuracy of evidence placed before them. This does not mean that the standard of proof in these cases can escape due process scrutiny, only that additional assurances of accuracy attend the application of the standard in New York termination proceedings.
13
The majority dismisses the child's interest in the accuracy of determinations made at the factfinding hearing because “[t]he factfinding does not purport ... to balance the child's interest in a normal family home against the parents' interest in raising the child,” but instead “pits the State directly against the parents.” Ante, at 1397. Only “[a]fter the State has established parental unfitness,” the majority reasons, may the court “assume ... that the interests of the child and the natural parents do diverge.” Ante, at 1398.
This reasoning misses the mark. The child has an interest in the outcome of the factfinding hearing independent of that of the parent. To be sure, “the child and his parents share a vital interest in preventing erroneous termination of their natural relationship.” Ibid. (emphasis added). But the child's interest in a continuation of the family unit exists only to the extent that such a continuation would not be harmful to him. An error in the factfinding hearing that results in a failure to terminate a parent-child relationship which rightfully should be terminated may well detrimentally affect the child. See nn. 14, 15, infra.
The preponderance-of-the-evidence standard, which allocates the risk of error more or less evenly, is employed when the social disutility of error in either direction is roughly equal—that is, when an incorrect finding of fault would produce consequences as undesirable as the consequences that would be produced by an incorrect finding of no fault. Only when the disutility of error in one direction discernibly outweighs the disutility of error in the other direction do we choose, by means of the standard of proof, to reduce the likelihood of the more onerous outcome. See In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 370–372, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 1075–1077, 25 L.Ed.2d 368 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring).
New York's adoption of the preponderance-of-the-evidence standard reflects its conclusion that the undesirable consequence of an erroneous finding of parental unfitness—the unwarranted termination of the family relationship—is roughly equal to the undesirable consequence of an erroneous finding of parental fitness—the risk of permanent injury to the child either by return of the child to an abusive home or by the child's continued lack of a permanent home. See nn. 14, 15, infra. Such a conclusion is well within the province of state legislatures. It cannot be said that the New York procedures are unconstitutional simply because a majority of the Members of this Court disagree with the New York Legislature's weighing of the interests of the parents and the child in an error-free factfinding hearing.
14
The record in this case illustrates the problems that may arise when a child is returned to an abusive home. Eighteen months after Tina, petitioners' oldest child, was first removed from petitioners' home, she was returned to the home on a trial basis. Katherine Weiss, a supervisor in the Child Protective Unit of the Ulster County Child Welfare Department, later testified in Family Court that “[t]he attempt to return Tina to her home just totally blew up.” Exhibit to Brief for Respondent Kramer 135. When asked to explain what happened, Mrs. Weiss testified that “there were instances on the record in this court of Mr. Santosky's abuse of his wife, alleged abuse of the children and proven neglect of the children.” Ibid. Tina again was removed from the home, this time along with John and Jed.
15
The New York Legislature recognized the potential harm to children of extended, non-permanent foster care. It found “that many children who have been placed in foster care experience unnecessarily protracted stays in such care without being adopted or returned to their parents or other custodians. Such unnecessary stays may deprive these children of positive, nurturing family relationships and have deleterious effects on their development into responsible, productive citizens.” SSL § 384–b.1. (b). Subsequent studies have proved this finding correct. One commentator recently wrote of “the lamentable conditions of many foster care placements” under the New York system even today. He noted: “Over fifty percent of the children in foster care have been in this ‘temporary’ status for more than two years; over thirty percent for more than five years. During this time, many children are placed in a sequence of ill-suited foster homes, denying them the consistent support and nurturing that they so desperately need.” Besharov, State Intervention To Protect Children: New York's Definition of “Child Abuse” and “Child Neglect,” 26 N.Y.L. S. L.Rev. 723, 770–771 (1981) (footnotes omitted). In this case, petitioners' three children have been in foster care for more than four years, one child since he was only three days old. Failure to terminate petitioners' parental rights will only mean a continuation of this unsatisfactory situation.
16
The majority's conclusion that a state interest in the child's well-being arises only after a determination of parental unfitness suffers from the same error as its assertion that the child has no interest, separate from that of its parents, in the accuracy of the factfinding hearing. See n. 13, supra.

