
27 See, e.g., Celnicker & Seaman, Functional Discounts, Trade Discounts, Economic Price Discrimination and the Robinson-Patman Act, 1989 Utah L. Rev. 813, 857 (1989) (concluding that "trade discounts often are manifestations of economic price discrimination. . . . If a trade discount violates the normal competitive disadvantage criteria used under the Act, no special devices should be employed to protect it"); Rill, 53 Antitrust L.J., at 940-941 ("Although it is entirely appropriate for the FTC and the courts to insist that some substantial services be performed in order for a buyer to earn a functional discount, a requirement of precise mathematical equivalency makes no sense"); 3 E. Kintner & J. Bauer, Federal Antitrust Law 318-320, and n. 305 (1983) "Functional discounts . . . are usually deemed lawful," but this usual rule is subject to exception in cases, "arising in unusual circumstances," when the seller's "discrimination caused" the tertiary line injury); Calvani, 17 B. C. Ind. & Com. L. Rev., at 549, and n. 26 (1976) (discounts to wholesalers are generally held not to injure competition, but this rule is subject to qualifications, and "perhaps the most important caveat focuses on the situation where the seller sells to both resellers and the consumers and the resellers pass on to consumers all or part of the wholesaling functional discount"); C. Edwards, Price Discrimination Law 312-313 (1959) ("It is not surprising that from time to time the Commission has been unable to avoid finding injurious discrimination between direct and indirect customers nor to avoid corrective orders that sought to define the gap between prices at successive levels of distribution"); Kelley, Functional Discounts Under the Robinson-Patman Act, 40 Cal. L. Rev. 526, 556 (1952) (concluding that the "characterization of a price differential between two purchasers as a functional or trade discount accords it no cloak of immunity from the prohibitions of the Robinson-Patman Act"); Shniderman, 60 Harv. L. Rev., at 599-600 (Commission's approach to functional discounts "may have been influenced by the possibility of subtle price discriminating techniques through the employment of wholesalers receiving more than ample discount differentials").
Professor Edwards, among others, describes the status of functional discounts under the Robinson-Patman Act with clear dissatisfaction. He complains that "The failure of the Congress to cope with the problem . . . has left the Commission an impossible job in this type of case." Price Discrimination Law, at 313. He adds that the Commission's "occasional proceedings" have been attributed to the "Commission's wrong-headedness." Id., at 312. Professor Edward's observations about the merits of the statute and about prosecutorial discretion are obviously irrelevant to our own inquiry. Unlike scholarly commentators, we have a duty to be faithful to congressional intent when interpreting statutes, and are not free to consider whether, or how, the statute should be rewritten.
28 "In practice, the competitive effects requirement permits a supplier to quote different prices between different distributor classes -- so long as those who are higher up (nearer the supplier) on the distribution ladder pay less than those who are further down (nearer the consumer)." F. Rowe, Price Discrimination Under the Robinson-Patman Act 174 (1962) (footnote omitted); see also id., at 178.

29 Rowe, writing prior to this Court's Perkins decision, describes the exception, which he identifies with the Standard Oil cases, as "of dubious validity today." Id., at 196. Rowe's analysis is flawed because he assumes that seller liability for tertiary line implications of wholesaler discounts must follow the logic of the Standard Oil complaint, and likewise assumes that this logic exposes to liability any seller who fails to monitor the resale prices of its wholesaler. Id., at 204. Indeed, Rowe's own discussion suggests one defect in his argument: legitimate wholesaler discounts will usually be insulated from liability by an absence of evidence on the causation issue. Id., at 203-204. In any event, nothing in our opinion today endorses a theory of liability under the Robinson-Patman Act for functional discounts so broad as the theory Rowe draws from Standard Oil.

30 The parties do not raise, and we therefore need not address, the question whether the inference of injury to competition might also be negated by evidence that disfavored buyers could make purchases at a reasonable discount from favored buyers.

31 In J. Truett Payne, 451 U.S., at 465-566, we quoted with approval the following passage:
 "Damage issues in these cases are rarely susceptible of the kind of concrete, detailed proof of injury which is available in other contexts. The Court has repeatedly held that in the absence of more precise proof, the factfinder may 'conclude as a matter of just and reasonable inference from the proof of defendants' wrongful acts and their tendency to injure plaintiffs' business, and from the evidence of the decline in prices, profits and values, not shown to be attributable to other causes, that defendants' wrongful acts had caused damage to the plaintiffs.' Bigelow v. RKO Pictures, Inc., [327 U.S.], at 264. See also Eastman Kodak Co. v. Southern Photo Materials Co., 273 U.S. 359, 377-379 (1927); Story Parchment Co. v. Paterson Parchment Paper Co., 282 U.S. 555, 561-566 (1931)." Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S., at 123-124.


                       Nor should any reader of the commentary on functional discounts be much surprised by today's result. Commentators have disagreed about the extent to     which functional discounts are generally or presumptively allowable under the Robinson-Patman Act. They nevertheless tend to agree that in exceptional cases what is nominally a functional discount may be an unjustifiable price discrimination entirely within the coverage of the Act. 27 Others, like Frederick    Rowe, have asserted the legitimacy of function discounts in more sweeping terms, 28 but even Rowe concedes the existence of an "exception to the general rule." F. Rowe, Price Discrimination Under the Robinson-Patman Act 174, n. 7 (1962); id., at 195-205. 29
         

         

                      We conclude that the commentators' analysis, like the reasoning in Perkins and like the Federal Trade Commission's practice, renders implausible Texaco's contention that holding it liable here involves some departure from established understandings. Perhaps respondents' case against Texaco    rests more squarely than do most functional discount cases upon direct evidence of the seller's intent to pass a price advantage through an intermediary. This difference, however, hardly cuts in Texaco's favor. In any event, the evidence produced by respondents also shows the scrambled functions which have more frequently signaled the illegitimacy under the Act of what is alleged to be a permissible functional discount. Both Gull and Dompier received the full discount on all their purchases even though most of their volume was resold directly to consumers. The extra margin on those sales obviously enabled them to price aggressively in both their retail and their wholesale marketing. To the extent that Dompier and Gull competed with respondents in the retail market, the presumption of adverse effect on competition recognized in the Morton Salt case becomes all the more appropriate. Their competitive advantage in that market also constitutes evidence tending to rebut any presumption of legality that would otherwise apply to their wholesale sales.
    The evidence indicates, moreover, that Texaco affirmatively encouraged Dompier to expand its retail business and that Texaco was fully informed about the persistent and marketwide consequences of its own pricing policies. Indeed, its own executives recognized that the dramatic impact on the market was almost entirely attributable to the magnitude of the distributor discount and the hauling allowance. Yet at the same time that Texaco was encouraging Dompier to integrate downward, and supplying Dompier with a generous discount useful to such integration, Texaco was inhibiting upward integration by the respondents: two of the respondents sought permission from Texaco to haul their own fuel using their own tankwagons, but Texaco refused. The special facts of this case thus make it peculiarly difficult for Texaco to claim that it is being held liable for the independent pricing decisions of Gull or Dompier.

 
                     As we recognized in Falls City Industries,  "the competitive injury component of a Robinson-Patman Act violation is not limited to the injury to competition between the favored and the disfavored purchaser; it also encompasses the injury to competition between their customers." 460 U.S., at 436. This conclusion is compelled by the statutory language, which specifically encompasses not only the adverse effect of price discrimination on persons who either grant or knowingly receive the benefit of such discrimination, but also on "customers of either of them." Such indirect competitive effects surely may not be presumed automatically in every functional discount setting, and, indeed,     one would expect that most functional discounts will be legitimate discounts which do not cause harm to competition. At the least, a functional discount that constitutes a reasonable reimbursement for the purchasers' actual marketing functions will not violate the Act. When a functional discount is legitimate, the inference of injury to competition recognized in the Morton Salt case will simply not arise. Yet it is also true that not every functional discount is entitled to a judgment of legitimacy, and that it will sometimes be possible to produce evidence showing that a particular functional discount caused a price discrimination of the     sort the Act prohibits. When such anti-competitive effects are proved -- as we believe they were in this case -- they are covered by the Act. 30
    

VI
           At the trial respondents introduced evidence describing the diversion of their customers to specific stations supplied by Dompier. Respondents' expert testimony on damages also focused on the diversion of trade to specific Dompier-supplied stations. The expert testimony analyzed the entire    damages period, which ran from 1972 and 1981 and included a period prior to 1974 when Dompier did not own any retail stations (although the jury might reasonably have found that Dompier controlled the Red Carpet station from the outset of the damages period). Moreover, respondents offered no direct testimony of any diversion to Gull and testified that they did not even know that Gull was being supplied by Texaco. Texaco contends that by basing the damages award upon an extrapolation from data applicable to Dompier-supplied stations, respondents necessarily based the award upon the consequences of pricing decisions made by independent customers of Dompier. Texaco argues that the damages award must therefore be judged excessive as a matter of law.
Even if we were to agree with Texaco that Dompier was not a retailer throughout the damages period, we could not accept Texaco's argument. Texaco's theory improperly blurs the distinction between the liability and the damages issues. The proof established that Texaco's lower prices to Gull and Dompier were discriminatory throughout the entire nine-year period; that at least Gull, and apparently Dompier as well, was selling at retail during that entire period; that the discounts substantially affected competition throughout the entire market; and that they injured each of the respondents. There is no doubt that respondents' proof of a continuing violation of the Act throughout the nine-year period was sufficient. Proof of the specific amount of their damages was necessarily less precise. Even if some portion of some of respondents' injuries may be attributable to the conduct of independent retailers, the expert testimony nevertheless provided a sufficient basis for an acceptable estimate of the amount of damages. We have held that  a plaintiff may not recover damages merely by showing a violation of the Act; rather, the plaintiff must also "make     some showing of actual injury attributable to something the antitrust laws were designed to prevent. Perkins v. Standard Oil Co., 395 U.S. 642, 648    (1969) (plaintiff 'must, of course, be able to show a causal connection between the price discrimination in violation of the Act and the injury suffered')." J. Turett Payne v. Chrysler Motors Corp., 451 U.S., at 562. At the same time, however, we reaffirmed our "traditional rule excusing antitrust plaintiffs from an unduly rigorous standard of proving antitrust injury." Id., at 565. See also Zenith Radio Corp. v. Hazeltine Research, Inc., 395 U.S. 100, 123-124 (1969); Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., 327 U.S. 251, 264-265 (1946). 31 Moreover, as we have noted, Texaco did not     object to the instructions to the jury on the damages issue. A possible flaw in the jury's calculation of the amount of damages would not be an appropriate basis for granting Texaco's motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict.

The judgment is affirmed.
It is so ordered.
