
The Natural Gas Act divides responsibility over trade in natural gas between federal and state regulators. The Act and our cases interpreting it draw a firm line between national and local authority over this trade: If the Federal Government may regulate a subject, the States may not. Today the Court smudges this line. It holds that States may use their antitrust laws to regulate practices already regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission whenever “other considerations ... weigh against a finding of pre-emption.” Ante, at 1603. The Court’s make-it-up-as-you-go-along approach to preemption has no basis in the Act, contradicts our cases, and will prove unworkable in practice.
 

I
Trade in natural gas consists of three parts. A drilling company collects gas from the earth; a pipeline company then carries the gas to its destination and sells  *1604 it at wholesale to a local distributor; and the local distributor sells the gas at retail to industries and households. See ante, at 1595. The Natural Gas Act empowers the Commission to regulate the middle of this three-leg journey—interstate transportation and wholesale sales. 15 U.S.C. § 717 et seq. But it does not empower the Commission to regulate the opening and closing phases—production at one end, retail sales at the other—thus leaving those matters to the States. § 717(b). (Like the Court, I will for simplicity’s sake call the sales controlled by the Commission wholesale sales, and the companies controlled by the Commission pipelines. See ante, at 1596.)
 
Over 70 years ago, the Court concluded that the Act confers “exclusive jurisdiction upon the federal regulatory agency.” Public Util. Comm’n of Ohio v. United Fuel Gas Co., 317 U.S. 456, 469, 63 S.Ct. 369, 87 L.Ed. 396 (1943). The Court thought it “clear” that the Act contemplates “a harmonious, dual system of regulation of the natural gas industry—federal and state regulatory bodies operating side by side, each active in its own sphere,” “without any confusion of functions.” Id., at 467, 63 S.Ct. 369. The Court drew this inference from the law’s purpose and legislative history, though it could just as easily have relied on the law’s terms and structure. The Act grants the Commission a wide range of powers over wholesale sales and transportation, but qualifies only some of these powers with reservations of state authority over the same subject. See § 717g(a) (concurrent authority over recordkeeping); § 717h(a) (concurrent authority over depreciation and amortization rates). Congress’s decision to include express reservations of state power alongside these grants of authority, but to omit them alongside other grants of authority, suggests that the other grants are exclusive. Right or wrong, in any event, our inference of exclusivity is now settled beyond debate.
 
United Fuel rejected a State’s regulation of wholesale rates. Id., at 468, 63 S.Ct. 369. But our later holdings establish that the Act makes exclusive the Commission’s powers in general, not just its rate-setting power in particular. We have again and again set aside state laws—even those that do not purport to fix wholesale rates—for regulating a matter already subject to regulation by the Commission. See, e.g., Northern Natural Gas Co. v. State Corporation Comm’n of Kan., 372 U.S. 84, 89, 83 S.Ct. 646, 9 L.Ed.2d 601 (1963) (state regulation of pipelines’ gas purchases preempted because it “invade[s] the exclusive jurisdiction which the Natural Gas Act has conferred upon the [Commission]”); Exxon Corp. v. Eagerton, 462 U.S. 176, 185, 103 S.Ct. 2296, 76 L.Ed.2d 497 (1983) (state law prohibiting producers from passing on production taxes preempted because it “trespasse[s] upon FERC’s authority”); Schneidewind v. ANR Pipeline Co., 485 U.S. 293, 309, 108 S.Ct. 1145, 99 L.Ed.2d 316 (1988) (state securities regulation directly affecting wholesale rates and gas transportation facilities preempted because it regulates “matters that Congress intended FERC to regulate”). The test for preemption in this setting, the Court has confirmed, “ ‘is whether the matter on which the State asserts the right to act is in any way regulated by the Federal Act.’ ” Id., at 310, n. 13, 108 S.Ct. 1145.
 
Straightforward application of these precedents would make short work of the case at hand. The Natural Gas Act empowers the Commission to regulate “practice[s] ... affecting [wholesale] rate[s].” § 717d. Nothing in the Act suggests that the States share power to regulate these practices. The Commission has reasonably determined that this power allows it *1605 to regulate the behavior involved in this case, pipelines’ use of sham trades and false reports to manipulate gas price indices. Because the Commission’s exclusive authority extends to the conduct challenged here, state antitrust regulation of that conduct is preempted.
 

II
The Court agrees that the Commission may regulate index manipulation, but upholds state antitrust regulation of this practice anyway on account of “other considerations that weigh against a finding of pre-emption in this context.” Ante, at 1603. That is an unprecedented decision. The Court does not identify a single case—not one—in which we have sustained state regulation of behavior already regulated by the Commission. The Court’s justifications for its novel approach do not persuade.
 

A
The Court begins by considering “the target at which the state law aims.” Ante, at 1599. It reasons that because this case involves a practice that affects both wholesale and retail rates, the Act tolerates state regulation that takes aim at the practice’s retail-stage effects. Ibid.
 
This analysis misunderstands how the Natural Gas Act divides responsibilities between national and local regulators. The Act does not give the Commission the power to aim at particular effects; it gives it the power to regulate particular activities. When the Commission regulates those activities, it may consider their effects on all parts of the gas trade, not just on wholesale sales. It may, for example, set wholesale rates with the aim of encouraging producers to conserve gas supplies—even though production is a state-regulated activity. See Colorado Interstate Gas Co. v. FPC, 324 U.S. 581, 602–603, 65 S.Ct. 829, 89 L.Ed. 1206 (1945); id., at 609–610, 65 S.Ct. 829 (Jackson, J., concurring). Or it may regulate wholesale sales with an eye toward blunting the sales’ anticompetitive effects in the retail market—even though retail prices are controlled by the States. See FPC v. Conway Corp., 426 U.S. 271, 276–280, 96 S.Ct. 1999, 48 L.Ed.2d 626 (1976). The Court’s ad hoc partition of authority over index manipulation—leaving it to the Commission to control the practice’s consequences for wholesale sales, but allowing the States to target its consequences for retail sales—thus clashes with the design of the Act.
 
To justify its fixation on aims, the Court stresses that this case involves regulation of “background marketplace conditions” rather than regulation of wholesale rates or sales themselves. Ante, at 1602. But the Natural Gas Act empowers the Commission to regulate wholesale rates and “background” practices affecting such rates. It grants both powers in the same clause: “Whenever the Commission ... find[s] that a [wholesale] rate, charge, or classification ... [or] any rule, regulation, practice, or contract affecting such rate, charge, or classification is unjust [or] unreasonable, ... the Commission shall determine the just and reasonable rate, charge, classification, rule, regulation, practice, or contract to be thereafter observed.” § 717d(a) (emphasis added). Nothing in this provision, and for that matter nothing in the Act, suggests that federal authority over practices is a second-class power, somehow less exclusive than the authority over rates.
 
The Court persists that the background conditions in this case affect both wholesale and retail sales. Ante, at 1599. This observation adds atmosphere, but nothing more. The Court concedes that index manipulation’s dual effect does not weaken the Commission’s power to regulate it. *1606 Ante, at 1599. So too should the Court have seen that this simultaneous effect does not strengthen the claims of the States. It is not at all unusual for an activity controlled by the Commission to have effects in the States’ field; production, wholesale, and retail are after all interdependent stages of a single trade. We have never suggested that the rules of field preemption change in such situations. For example, producers’ ability to pass production taxes on to pipelines no doubt affects both producers and pipelines. Yet we had no trouble concluding that a state law restricting producers’ ability to pass these taxes impermissibly attempted to manage “a matter within the sphere of FERC’s regulatory authority.” Exxon, supra, at 185–186, 103 S.Ct. 2296.
 
The Court’s approach makes a snarl of our precedents. In Northern Natural, the Court held that the Act preempts state regulations requiring pipelines to buy gas ratably from gas wells. 372 U.S., at 90, 83 S.Ct. 646. The regulations in that case shared each of the principal features emphasized by the Court today. They governed background market conditions, not wholesale prices. Id., at 90–91, 83 S.Ct. 646. The background conditions in question, pipelines’ purchases from gas wells, affected both the federal field of wholesale sales and the state field of gas production. Id., at 92–93, 83 S.Ct. 646. And the regulations took aim at the purchases’ effects on production; they sought to promote conservation of natural resources by limiting how much gas pipelines could take from each well. Id., at 93, 83 S.Ct. 646. No matter; the Court still concluded that the regulations “invade [d] the federal agency’s exclusive domain.” Id., at 92, 83 S.Ct. 646. The factors that made no difference in Northern Natural should make no difference today.
 
Contrast Northern Natural with Northwest Central Pipeline Corp. v. State Corporation Comm’n of Kan., 489 U.S. 493, 109 S.Ct. 1262, 103 L.Ed.2d 509 (1989), which involved state regulations that restricted the times when producers could take gas from wells. On this occasion the Court upheld the regulations—not because the law aimed at the objective of gas conservation, but because the State pursued this end by regulating “ ‘the physical ac[t] of drawing gas from the earth.’ ” Id., at 510, 109 S.Ct. 1262. Our precedents demand, in other words, that the Court focus in the present case upon what the State seeks to regulate (a pipeline practice that is subject to regulation by the Commission), not why the State seeks to regulate it (to curb the practice’s effects on retail rates).
 
Trying to turn liabilities into assets, the Court brandishes statements from Northern Natural and Northwest Central that (in its view) discuss where state law was “aimed” or “directed.” Ante, at 1600. But read in context, these statements refer to the entity or activity that the state law regulates, not to which of the activity’s effects the law seeks to control by regulating it. See, e.g., Northern Natural, supra, at 94, 83 S.Ct. 646 (“[O]ur cases have consistently recognized a significant distinction ... between conservation measures aimed directly at interstate purchasers and wholesales ..., and those aimed at producers and production”); Northwest Central, supra, at 512, 109 S.Ct. 1262 (“[This regulation] is directed to the behavior of gas producers”). The lawsuits at hand target pipelines (entities regulated by the Commission) for their manipulation of indices (behavior regulated by the Commission). That should have sufficed to establish preemption.
 

B
The Court also tallies several features of state antitrust law that, it believes, weigh *1607 against preemption. Ante, at 1601. Once again the Court seems to have forgotten its precedents. We have said before that “ ‘Congress meant to draw a bright line easily ascertained, between state and federal jurisdiction’ ” over the gas trade. Nantahala Power & Light Co. v. Thornburg, 476 U.S. 953, 966, 106 S.Ct. 2349, 90 L.Ed.2d 943 (1986) (quoting FPC v. Southern Cal. Edison Co., 376 U.S. 205, 215–216, 84 S.Ct. 644, 11 L.Ed.2d 638 (1964)). Our decisions have therefore “ ‘squarely rejected’ ” the theory, endorsed by the Court today, that the boundary between national and local authority turns on “ ‘a case-by-case analysis of the impact of state regulation upon the national interest.’ ” Ibid.
 
State antitrust law, the Court begins, applies to “all businesses in the marketplace” rather than just “natural-gas companies in particular.” Ante, at 1601. So what? No principle of our natural-gas preemption jurisprudence distinguishes particularized state laws from state laws of general applicability. We have never suggested, for example, that a State may use general price-gouging laws to fix wholesale rates, or general laws about unfair trade practices to control wholesale contracts, or general common-carrier laws to administer interstate pipelines. The Court in any event could not have chosen a worse setting in which to attempt a distinction between general and particular laws. Like their federal counterpart, state antitrust laws tend to use the rule of reason to judge the lawfulness of challenged practices. Legal Aspects of Buying and Selling § 10:12 (P. Zeidman ed. 2014–2015). This amorphous standard requires the reviewing court to consider “a variety of factors, including specific information about the relevant business, its condition before and after the restraint was imposed, and the restraint’s history, nature, and effect.” State Oil Co. v. Khan, 522 U.S. 3, 10, 118 S.Ct. 275, 139 L.Ed.2d 199 (1997). Far from authorizing across-the-board application of a uniform requirement, therefore, the Court’s decision will invite state antitrust courts to engage in targeted regulation of the natural-gas industry.
 
The Court also stresses the “ ‘long history’ ” of state antitrust regulation. Ante, at 1601. Again, quite beside the point. States have long regulated public utilities, yet the Natural Gas Act precludes them from using that established power to fix gas wholesale prices. United Fuel, 317 U.S., at 468, 63 S.Ct. 369. States also have long enacted laws to conserve natural resources, yet the Act precludes them from deploying that power to control purchases made by gas pipelines. Northern Natural, 372 U.S., at 93–94, 83 S.Ct. 646. The Court’s invocation of the pedigree of state antitrust law rests on air.
 
One need not launch this unbounded inquiry into the features of state law in order to preserve the States’ authority to apply “tax laws,” “disclosure laws,” and “blue sky laws” to natural-gas companies, ante, at 1600. One need only stand by the principle that if the Commission has authority over a subject, the States lack authority over that subject. The Commission’s authority to regulate gas pipelines “in the public interest,” § 717a, is a power to address matters that are traditionally the concern of utility regulators, not “a broad license to promote the general public welfare,” NAACP v. FPC, 425 U.S. 662, 669, 96 S.Ct. 1806, 48 L.Ed.2d 284 (1976). We have explained that the Commission does not, for example, have power to superintend “employment discrimination” or “unfair labor practices.” Id., at 670–671, 96 S.Ct. 1806. So the Act does not preempt state employment discrimination or labor laws. But the Commission does have power to consider, say, “conservation, *1608 environmental, and antitrust questions.” Id., at 670, n. 6, 96 S.Ct. 1806 (emphasis added). So the Act does preempt state antitrust laws.
 

C
At bottom, the Court’s decision turns on its perception that the Natural Gas Act “ ‘was drawn with meticulous regard for the continued exercise of state power.’ ” Ante, at 1599. No doubt the Act protects state authority in a variety of ways. It gives the Commission authority over only some parts of the gas trade. § 717(b). It establishes procedures under which the Commission may consult, collaborate, or share information with States. § 717p. It even provides that the Commission may regulate practices affecting wholesale rates “upon its own motion or upon complaint of any State.” § 717d(a) (emphasis added). It should have gone without saying, however, that no law pursues its purposes at all costs. Nothing in the Act and nothing in our cases suggests that Congress protected state power in the way imagined by today’s decision: by licensing state sorties into the Commission’s domain whenever judges conclude that an incursion would not be too disruptive.
 
The Court’s preoccupation with the purpose of preserving state authority is all the more inexpiable because that is not the Act’s only purpose. The Act also has competing purposes, the most important of which is promoting “uniformity of regulation.” Northern Natural, supra, at 91, 83 S.Ct. 646. The Court’s decision impairs that objective. Before today, interstate pipelines knew that their practices relating to price indices had to comply with one set of regulations promulgated by the Commission. From now on, however, pipelines will have to ensure that their behavior conforms to the discordant regulations of 50 States—or more accurately, to the discordant verdicts of untold state antitrust juries. The Court’s reassurance that pipelines may still invoke conflict preemption, see ante, at 1602, provides little comfort on this front. Conflict preemption will resolve only discrepancies between state and federal regulations, not the discrepancies among differing state regulations to which today’s opinion subjects the industry.
 
* * *
 
“The Natural Gas Act was designed ... to produce a harmonious and comprehensive regulation of the industry. Neither state nor federal regulatory body was to encroach upon the jurisdiction of the other.” FPC v. Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co., 337 U.S. 498, 513, 69 S.Ct. 1251, 93 L.Ed. 1499 (1949) (footnote omitted). Today, however, the Court allows the States to encroach. Worse still, it leaves pipelines guessing about when States will be allowed to encroach again. May States aim at retail rates under laws that share none of the features of antitrust law advertised today? Under laws that share only some of those features? May States apply their antitrust laws to pipelines without aiming at retail rates? But that is just the start. Who knows what other “considerations that weigh against a finding of preemption” remain to be unearthed in future cases? The Court’s all-things-considered test does not make for a stable background against which to carry on the natural gas trade.
 
I would stand by the more principled and more workable line traced by our precedents. The Commission may regulate the practices alleged in this case; the States therefore may not. I respectfully dissent.
 




