
        
        U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Vill. at Lakeridge, LLC, 200 L.Ed.2d 218 (U.S. 2018)
        


      

Justice Kennedy, concurring.

I join the opinion for the Court and the concurring opinion by Justice Sotomayor. In doing so, it seems appropriate to add these further comments.

As the Court’s opinion makes clear, courts of appeals may continue to elaborate [**19]  in more detail the legal standards that will govern whether a person or entity is a non-statutory insider under the Bankruptcy Code. Ante, at 6, 11, n. 7. At this stage of the doctrine’s evolution, this ongoing elaboration of the principles that underlie non-statutory insider status seems necessary to ensure uniform and accurate adjudications in this area.

In particular, courts should consider the relevance and meaning of the phrase “arms-length transaction” in this bankruptcy context. See ibid. As courts of appeals address these issues and make more specific rulings based on the facts and circumstances of individual cases, it may be that instructive, more specifically defined rules will develop.

 [*230]  This leads to an additional point. Under the test that the Court of Appeals applied here, there is some room for doubt that the Bankruptcy Judge was correct in concluding that Rabkin was not an insider, especially without further inquiry into whether the offer Bartlett made to Rabkin could and should have been made to other parties who might have paid a higher price. See In re Village at Lakeridge, LLC, 814 F. 3d 993, 1006 (CA9 2016) (Clifton, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (“[E]ven if the clear error standard applies, the finding that Rabkin [**20]  was not a non-statutory insider cannot survive scrutiny”). MBP’s failure to offer its claim more widely could be a strong indication that the transaction was not conducted at arm’s length. As the Court is careful and correct to note, however, certiorari was not granted on this question. See ante, at 11, n. 7. As a result, whether the test for non-statutory insider status as formulated and used by courts in the Ninth Circuit is sufficient is not before us; and whether on these facts it was clear error to find that Rabkin was not an insider is also not before us.

The Court’s holding should not be read as indicating that the non-statutory insider test as formulated by the Court of Appeals is the proper or complete standard to use in determining insider status. Today’s opinion for the Court properly limits its decision to the question whether the Court of Appeals applied the correct standard of review, and its opinion should not be read as indicating that a transaction is arm’s length if the transaction was negotiated simply with a close friend, without broader solicitation of other possible buyers.
