    The second route into federal court under Title VIII -- § 812 -- provides simply that "[the] rights granted by sections     803, 804, 805, and 806 of this title may be enforced by civil actions in appropriate United States district courts . . . ." 42 U. S. C. § 3612. Despite the absence from § 812 of the "person aggrieved" language so crucial to our holding in Trafficante regarding standing under § 810, the Court today holds that "[standing] under § 812, like that under § 810, is 'as [broad] as is permitted by Article III of the Constitution.'" Ante, at 109, quoting Trafficante     v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., supra, at 209.     I think that the Court's decision ignores the plain language of § 812 and makes nonsense out of Title VIII's formerly sensible statutory enforcement scheme.
 I
The doctrine of standing is comprised of both constitutional limitations on the jurisdiction of federal courts and prudential rules of self-restraint designed to bar from federal court those parties who are ill-suited to litigate the claims they assert. In its constitutional dimension, the standing inquiry asks whether the party before the court has "'such a personal stake in the outcome of the controversy' as to warrant his invocation of federal-court jurisdiction and to justify     exercise of the court's remedial powers on his behalf." Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 498-499 (1975) (emphasis in original), quoting Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186, 204 (1962). The crucial elements of standing are injury in fact and causation. To demonstrate the "personal stake" in the litigation necessary to satisfy the Constitution, the party must suffer "a distinct and palpable injury," Warth v. Seldin, supra, at 501, that bears a "'fairly traceable' causal connection" to the challenged action. Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc., 438 U.S. 59, 72 (1978), quoting Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 261 (1977).    Accordingly, when an objection to a party's standing to litigate in federal court is constitutionally based, "the relevant inquiry is whether . . . the plaintiff has shown an injury to himself that is likely to be redressed by a favorable decision." Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Org., 426 U.S. 26, 38 (1976).
A plaintiff who alleges sufficient injury to satisfy these minimum constitutional limitations on federal jurisdiction may nonetheless be barred from federal court under our prudential standing rules because he asserts a generalized grievance shared in substantially equal measure by all or a large class of citizens, Schlesinger v. Reservists Comm. to Stop the War, 418 U.S. 208 (1974), or because he seeks to "rest his claim to relief on the legal rights or interests of third parties" rather than his own. Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S., at 499. These prudential rules, however, are subject to modification by Congress, which may grant to any person satisfying Art. III's minimum standing requirements a right "to seek relief on the basis of the legal rights and interests of others, and, indeed, [to] invoke the    general public interest in support of [his] claim." Id., at 501. Congress did just that in enacting § 810 of Title VIII, which grants to "[any] person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice" a right to seek federal administrative and judicial relief. In Trafficante,     supra, we held that the broad definition given "person aggrieved" in § 810 indicated a congressional intent to accord apartment dwellers, who had not themselves suffered discrimination, an actionable     right to be free from the adverse consequences flowing to them from racially discriminatory rental practices directed at third parties. Plaintiffs' alleged "loss of important benefits from interracial associations," 409 U.S., at 210, was sufficient to satisfy the injury-in-fact requirement of Art. III.
    In     the case now before us, respondents -- the village of Bellwood, five of its residents, and one resident of a neighboring community -- brought suit against petitioner real estate firms, alleging that the firms had violated both 42 U. S. C. § 1982and § 804 of Title VIII by "steering" prospective homebuyers to different areas in and around Bellwood according to their race. Like plaintiffs in Trafficante, the individual respondents allege that petitioners' practice of racial steering has deprived them of "the social and professional benefits of living in an integrated society." App. 6, 99. Respondent village of Bellwood alleges that it has been injured "by having [its] housing market . . . wrongfully and illegally     manipulated to the economic and social detriment of [its] citizens." Ibid. Unlike plaintiffs in Trafficante, however, respondents have not proceeded under § 810 of Title VIII, choosing instead to travel the direct route into federal court provided by § 812.
 In pertinent part, § 812 provides:
"The rights granted by sections 803, 804, 805, and 806 may be enforced by civil actions in appropriate United States district courts without regard to the amount in controversy and in appropriate State or local courts of general jurisdiction." 82 Stat. 88, 42 U. S. C. § 3612 (a).
The language of § 812 contains no indication that Congress intended to authorize the commencement of suits under Title VIII by persons who would otherwise be barred from federal court by prudential standing rules. Indeed, were § 812 the only method for enforcing Title VIII, respondents -- who were not themselves discriminated against by petitioners -- could hardly argue that they were statutorily authorized to seek relief on the basis of legal rights and interests of third parties who had been racially "steered" into and away from certain areas in the community. The Court, however, in effect reads the broadly defined "person aggrieved" language of § 810 into § 812, holding that the alternative routes into federal court provided     under the sections are available to precisely the same class of plaintiffs. The language    and structure of Title VIII lead me to a contrary conclusion.
II
The term "person aggrieved" is used throughout § 810 -- no less than four times -- to denominate the proper § 810 claimant; by contrast, in § 812 Congress wholly avoided use of this broadly defined term, preferring instead the familiar "plaintiff." Noting that § 812 is phrased in the passive voice,     the Court concludes that the absence of the "person aggrieved" language from the provision "does not indicate that standing is more limited under that provision than under § 810." Ante, at 103 (emphasis added). The point of our decision in Trafficante, however, was that the presence of the "person aggrieved" language in § 810 demonstrated Congress' affirmative intent to abrogate prudential standing rules and to expand standing under the section to the full extent permitted by Art. III of the Constitution. It thus follows that the absence of "person aggrieved" from § 812 indicates that Congress did not intend to abrogate the normal prudential rules of standing with regard to § 812.
    Consistent with § 810's broad grant of standing is the language chosen by Congress to define the scope of the civil action that may be brought under the section: "[The] person aggrieved may . . . commence a civil action in any appropriate United States district court . . . to enforce the rights granted or protected by this title . . . ." 82 Stat. 86, 42 U. S. C. § 3610 (d) (emphasis added). Section 812, in contrast, authorizes the commencement of a     civil action to enforce only "[the] rights granted by," as opposed to "rights granted or protected by," §§ 803, 804, 805, and 806. Clearly, Congress contemplated that § 812 suits could be instituted only by persons alleging injury to rights expressly secured under the enumerated sections.
Section 804, the provision allegedly offended by petitioners, provides in pertinent part:
"[It] shall be unlawful --
"(a) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
"(b) To discriminate against any    person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or     in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
. . . .
"(d) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available." 82 Stat. 83, as amended, 88 Stat. 729, 42 U. S. C. § 3604.
In essence, § 804 grants to all persons seeking housing the right not to be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Nowhere in the section are the individual respondents granted a right to reap the "social and professional benefits of living in an integrated society." Nor does § 804 grant the village of Bellwood an actionable right not to have its housing market "wrongfully and illegally manipulated." Accordingly, respondents have suffered no injury to "rights granted by [§ 804]."
    The structure of both § 810 and § 812 and the significant differences between the two enforcement provisions further support the conclusion that Congress intended to restrict access to federal courts under § 812 to a more limited class of plaintiffs than that contemplated under § 810. A "person aggrieved" proceeding under § 810 must first file a complaint with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, who is authorized "to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion." 42 U. S. C. § 3610 (a). The Secretary, however, must defer to the appropriate state     or local agency whenever state or local fair-housing laws provide rights and remedies substantially equivalent to those secured under Title VIII. The Secretary may recommence action on the complaint only upon certification that such action is necessary to protect the rights of the parties or the interests of justice. 42 U. S. C. § 3610(c). If the Secretary's informal efforts prove futile, the "person aggrieved" may commence a civil action under Title VIII in federal    district court, but only if he has no comparable judicial remedy under "substantially equivalent" state or local fair-housing legislation. 42 U. S. C. § 3610 (d).
The § 812 "plaintiff" is not similarly encumbered. He may proceed directly into federal court, deferring neither to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development nor to state administrative and judicial processes. See 42 U. S. C. § 3612 (a). The District Court is authorized to appoint an attorney for the § 812 plaintiff and to waive payment of fees, costs, and security. 42 U. S. C. § 3612(b). Additionally, broader relief is available under § 812. The "prevailing plaintiff" may be awarded a "permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and . . . actual damages and not more than $ 1,000 punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees . . . .     " 42 U. S. C. § 3612 (c). Section 810, by contrast, makes no allowance for damages, costs, or counsel fees, limiting the victorious claimant to injunctive relief and such other affirmative action as may    be appropriate. 42 U. S. C. § 3610 (d). Nor does § 812 contain a provision similar to § 810 (e), which provides that "[in] any proceeding brought pursuant to [§ 810], the burden of proof shall be on the complainant." Given the advantages to the claimant of proceeding under § 812, it is hard to imagine why anyone would voluntarily proceed under § 810 if both routes were equally available.
    When the carefully chosen language and the widely variant provisions of § 810 and § 812 are thus compared, the logic of     Title VIII's private enforcement mechanism becomes clear. Immediate access to federal judicial power under § 812 was reserved to those directly victimized by a discriminatory housing practice; that is, those actually discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Only direct victims of housing discrimination were deemed to suffer injuries of sufficient magnitude to authorize appointment of counsel and recovery of compensatory and punitive damages, costs, and attorney fees. But because discrimination in housing can injure persons other than the direct objects of the discrimination,     Trafficante, 409 U.S., at 210, Congress believed that the statute's fair-housing goals would be served by extending standing under § 810 as broadly as constitutionally permissible. Anyone claiming to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice, even if not himself directly discriminated against, is authorized to seek redress under § 810. By barring indirect victims of housing discrimination from immediate access to federal court under § 812, and thus requiring them to exhaust federal conciliation procedures as well as viable state and local remedies pursuant to § 810, Congress sought to facilitate informal resolution of Title VIII disputes, to avoid federal judicial intervention when possible, and to encourage state and local involvement in the effort to eliminate housing discrimination.
The legislative history of Title VIII, while "not too helpful," Trafficante, supra, at 210, supports the view that standing to commence a civil action under § 812 is limited to direct victims of housing discrimination. Introduced on the Senate floor and approved unchanged by the House, Title VIII's legislative history must be culled primarily from    the Congressional Record. The brief debate preceding adoption of Amendment No. 586, which amended § 810 to require exhaustion of "substantially equivalent" remedies under state or local fair-housing laws as a prerequisite to the filing of a Title     VIII action in federal court, is particularly enlightening. Senator Miller, who introduced the amendment, explained:
"I provide in the second part of my amendment that no civil action may be brought in any U.S. district court if the person aggrieved has a judicial remedy under a State or local fair housing law which provides substantially equivalent rights and remedies to this act.
"I believe it is a matter of letting the State and local courts have jurisdiction. We in the Senate know that our Federal district court calendars are crowded enough, without adding to that load if there is a good remedy under State law." 114 Cong. Rec. 4987 (1968).
Senator Hart added that the amendment "recognizes the desire all of us share that the State remedies, where adequate, be availed of and that unnecessary burdening litigation not further clog the court calendars." Ibid. It seems unlikely that Congress would wholly frustrate    the concerns     moving it to adopt § 810's exhaustion requirement by opening § 812's direct route into federal court to all "persons aggrieved."
The debate concerning the allowance of attorney's fees to prevailing plaintiffs under § 812 also indicates a congressional understanding that standing to proceed immediately into federal court under § 812 was limited to discriminatees. Senator     Hart commented that §§ 812 (b) and (c) -- which authorize the district court to waive payment of fees, costs, and security in appropriate cases and to award damages, court costs, and reasonable attorney fees to prevailing plaintiffs -- "reveal a clear congressional intent to permit, and even encourage, litigation by those who cannot afford to redress specific wrongs aimed at them because of the color of their skin." 114 Cong. Rec. 5514-5515 (1968) (emphasis added).
The meager legislative history marshaled by the Court provides at best thin support for its expansive interpretation of standing under § 812. References in the legislative history describing § 812 as an "[additional]" and "alternative" remedial     provision to § 810, ante, at 106, and nn.     16, 17, and 18, are hardly dispositive: one need only read the two sections to conclude that they provide "alternative" enforcement mechanisms. That § 810 and § 812 are "alternative" remedial provisions does not, however, compel the conclusion that they are equally available to all potential Title VIII claimants. The only piece of legislative history arguably supporting the Court's interpretation of § 812 is the House Judiciary Committee staff's use of the term "aggrieved person" to refer to potential § 812 plaintiffs. Ante, at 107 n. 18. This single, fleeting reference in the legislative history hardly seems sufficient to overwhelm the contrary indications of congressional intent found elsewhere in Title VIII's legislative history and in the carefully worded and structured provisions of § 810 and § 812.
I think that Trafficante pushed standing to the limit in construing the "person aggrieved" language of § 810. I cannot join the Court in pressing the more narrowly confined language of § 812 to the same limit.
III
Respondents also claim standing under 42 U. S. C. § 1982, which provides: "All citizens of the United States shall have    the same right . . . as is enjoyed by white citizens . . . to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property." Unlike Title VIII, "§ 1982 is not a comprehensive open housing law." Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., 392 U.S. 409, 413 (1968). Enacted as part of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, the section bars all racial discrimination, both private and public, in the sale or rental of property. Ibid.
It is clear that respondents have suffered no injury to the only right secured under § 1982-- the right to be free from racially motivated interference with property rights. Their claim of standing under § 1982 is thus conceptually indistinguishable from a similar claim rejected by this Court in     Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490 (1975). Plaintiffs in Warth brought a § 1982 action against the town of Penfield, N. Y., and    members of its Zoning, Planning, and Town Boards, claiming that the town's zoning ordinance effectively excluded persons of minority racial and ethnic groups. One of the plaintiffs, a nonprofit corporation organized to alleviate the housing shortage for low- and moderate-income    persons in and around Penfield, based its standing to challenge the zoning ordinance on the loss to its members residing in Penfield of the "benefits of living in a racially and ethnically integrated community." 422 U.S., at 512. This Court rejected plaintiff's claim of standing, distinguishing Trafficante on the ground that § 1982, unlike § 810 of Title VIII, does not give residents of certain communities an actionable right to be free from the adverse consequences of racially discriminatory practices directed at and immediately harmful to others. Thus, we held plaintiff's "attempt to raise putative rights of third parties," 422 U.S., at 514, barred by the prudential rules of standing.
Like plaintiffs in Warth, respondents claim that they have been injured by racially discriminatory acts practiced on others. Thus, their claim of standing under § 1982 must also fail.
    Because I think that respondents have no standing to litigate claims under 42 U. S. C. § 1982 and § 812 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, I would reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals.

