    Although the statutory conditions established in § 753 (f) with respect to furnishing a free transcript to movants in § 2255 proceedings are therefore consistent with the due process requirements of the Fifth Amendment, it is undoubtedly true that they place an indigent in a somewhat less advantageous position than a person of means. But neither the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, nor the counterpart equal protection requirement embodied in the Fifth Amendment, guarantees "absolute equality or precisely equal advantages," San Antonio School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1, 24 (1973). In the context of a criminal proceeding they require only "an adequate opportunity to present [one's] claims fairly…." Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S. 600, 616 (1974).
In Douglas v. California, supra, the Court held that the State must provide counsel for an indigent on his first appeal as of right. But in Ross v. Moffitt, supra, we declined to extend that holding to a discretionary second appeal from an intermediate appellate court to the Supreme Court of North Carolina. We think the distinction between these two holdings     of the Court is of considerable assistance in resolving respondent's equal protection claim. Respondent in this case had an opportunity for direct appeal, and had he chosen to pursue it he would have been furnished a free transcript of the trial proceedings. But having forgone that right, and instead some years later having sought to obtain a free transcript in order to make the best case he could in a     proceeding under § 2255, respondent stands in a different position.
The Court has held that when a State grants a right to collateral review, it may not deny the right to an indigent simply because of inability to pay the required filing fee,    Smith v. Bennett, 365 U.S. 708 (1961). There is no such impediment here; respondent was permitted to proceed in forma pauperis in his § 2255 action. The Court has also held that a State may not confide to the public defender the final decision as to whether a transcript shall be available to the criminal defendant who collaterally attacks his conviction, Lane v.Brown, 372 U.S. 477 (1963). There the Court observed that the state provision "confers upon a state officer outside the judicial system power to    take from an indigent all hope of any appeal at all." Id., at 485.
The congressional statute governing the furnishing of free transcripts to plaintiffs in § 2255actions has no such infirmity. The decision as to the provisions of the transcript at public expense is made initially by an official at the very heart of the judicial system - a district judge in the judicial district in which the § 2255 plaintiff was tried. The district court has the power to order a free transcript furnished if it finds that the "suit… is not frivolous and that the transcript is needed to decide the issue presented…." 28 U.S.C. § 753(f).
We think that the formula devised by Congress satisfies the equal protection component of the Fifth Amendment. Respondent chose to forgo his opportunity for direct appeal with its attendant unconditional free transcript. This choice affects his later equal protection claim as well as     his due process claim. Equal protection does not require the Government to furnish to the indigent a delayed duplicate of a right of appeal with attendant free transcript which it offered in the first     instance, even though a criminal defendant of means might well    decide to purchase such a transcript in pursuit of relief under § 2255. The basic question is one of adequacy of respondent's access to procedures for review of his conviction, Ross v. Moffitt, supra, and it must be decided in the light of avenues which respondent chose not to follow as well as those he now seeks to widen. We think it enough at the collateral-relief stage that Congress has provided that the transcript be paid for by public funds if one demonstrates to a district judge that his § 2255 claim is not frivolous, and that the transcript is needed to decide the issue presented.
Respondent urged in oral argument that if trial counsel had done a poor job of representing a criminal defendant, such counsel might well urge the defendant to forgo his right of appeal in order to prevent a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel from being raised on the appeal. It is certainly conceivable that such a state of facts might exist, notwithstanding the fidelity to the interest of their clients demonstrated repeatedly by the overwhelming majority of the members of the legal profession. But § 753(f) does not require that a § 2255 plaintiff must prove his    claim in order to obtain a transcript, but only that he convince the district court that such claim is not frivolous. Had the District Court here been confronted not with merely a conclusory allegation, but with some factual allegations indicating a denial of respondent's Sixth Amendment right to counsel, together with an additional explicit assertion that trial counsel     had urged respondent to forgo his appeal, that court might have concluded that such a claim was not frivolous, and further decided that a free transcript should be furnished pursuant to § 753(f).  
    But that is not our case. Respondent made only a naked allegation of ineffective assistance of counsel. Since any discussion he may have had with his trial counsel as to the desirability of appeal would not normally appear in the    transcript of proceedings at trial, the furnishing of such transcript would not have aided him in refreshing his recollection of such discussions. The failure to flesh out this aspect of respondent's claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, then, is not likely to have been cured by a transcript.
We think this is an area of the law where the opinions of the courts of appeals are entitled to particular weight, since they represent not only expositions of federal and constitutional law, but also expressions of essentially practical judgment on questions which those courts must confront far more than we do. The fact that with the exception of the decision presently under review they have unanimously concluded that the conditions established by § 753(f)for the furnishing of a free transcript do not violate the Fifth Amendment is significant. A practical reason for their conclusion is well expressed by Judge Haynsworth in United States v. Shoaf, 341 F. 2d 832 (CA4 1964), in which he said for that court: S
"The usual grounds for successful collateral attacks upon convictions arise out of occurrences outside     of the courtroom or of events in the courtroom of    which the defendant was aware and can recall without the need of having his memory    refreshed by reading a transcript. He may well have a need of a transcript [to support his claim] but rarely, if ever,… to become aware of the events or occurrences which constitute a ground for collateral attack," Id., at 835. 
We conclude that the fact that a transcript was available had respondent chosen to appeal from his conviction, and remained available on the conditions set forth in § 753 to an indigent proceeding under § 2255, afforded respondent an adequate opportunity to attack his conviction. To hold otherwise would be to place the indigent defendant in a more favorable position than a similarly situated prisoner of some, but not unlimited, means, who presumably would make an evaluation much like that prescribed in § 753(f) before he spent his own funds for a transcript. S
"[The] fact that a particular service might be of benefit to an     indigent defendant does not mean that the service is constitutionally required. The duty of the State under our cases is not to duplicate the legal arsenal that may be privately retained by a criminal defendant in a continuing effort to reverse    his conviction, but only to assure the indigent defendant an adequate opportunity to present his claims fairly in the context of the State's appellate process." Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S., at 616.I
    The judgment of the Court of    Appeals for the Ninth Circuit is
Reversed.
1. Our Brother STEVENS would construe the pertinent part of § 753(f) to "make transcripts available almost automatically in § 2255 proceedings…," post, at 338. We think such a construction would do violence to the intent of Congress which clearly appears from the language of that section, supra, at 320. Congress did in that section make transcripts available automatically on direct appeal, but in the same section limited their availability in § 2255 motions to cases where the trial judge certifies that the § 2255 suit is not frivolous and that the transcript is needed to decide the issue presented by the suit. Our Brother STEVENS advances what may well be very sound policy reasons for furnishing free transcripts as a matter of course to § 2255 plaintiffs, as well as to convicted defendants pursuing direct appeals. But it is plain from a reading of § 753(f) that these considerations have not yet commended themselves to Congress.

2. The difference is not as great as it might appear to be, however, because habeas corpus petitioners who wish to proceed in forma pauperis must still overcome a "nonfrivolous "barrier under 28 U.S.C. § 1915. E.g., Kitchens v. Alderman, 376 F. 2d 262 (CA5 1967); Blair v. California, 340 F. 2d 741 (CA9 1965).

3. The constitutional treatment of habeas corpus, of course, is not contained in the Due Process Clause, but in Art. I, § 9, cl. 2, of the Constitution.

4. Since a § 2255 claim is usually presented to the trial judge he will likely have an independent recollection of counsel's performance which may well lead him to conclude that a movant's claim is nonfrivolous.

5. E.g., Ellis v. Maine, 448 F. 2d 1325 (CA1 1971); United States ex rel. Buford v. Henderson, 524 F. 2d 147 (CA2 1975); United States v. Shoaf, 341 F. 2d 832 (CA4 1964); United States v. Herrera, 474 F. 2d 1049 (CA5 1973); Hoover v. United States, 416 F. 2d 431 (CA6 1969); United States ex rel. Nunes v. Nelson, 467 F. 2d 1380 (CA9 1972) (habeas corpus); Taylor v. United States, 238 F. 2d 409 (CA9 1956) ( § 2255 motion); Hines v. Baker, 422 F. 2d 1002 (CA10 1970).

6. This opinion and other aspects of this question were thoroughly discussed shortly after the 1965 amendment to § 753(f) in Blackmun, Allowance of In Forma Pauperis Appeals in § 2255 and Habeas Corpus Cases, 43 F.R.D. 343 (1967).
