
Once again the Court's preoccupation with procedural niceties has needlessly complicated the disposition of a federal habeas corpus petition. Cf. Rose v. Lundy, ante, p. 509. Lurking in the background of this case is the question whether the failure to conduct a lineup has any bearing on the validity of a photographic identification. The Court may one day confront that question. For the present, however, it is more concerned with the Court of Appeals' misunderstanding of the ill-defined mandate of Sumner v. Mata, 449 U.S. 539, and 28 U. S. C. § 2254(d).

We now seem to agree that § 2254(d) applies to a "basic, primary, or historical fact" and that it does not apply to a "mixed question of law and fact." The articulation of this     proposition certainly is an improvement on the Court's opinion of last Term, which understandably confounded the Court of Appeals on remand. Judge Sneed in dissent read --     incorrectly, it turns out -- the Court's opinion to apply § 2254(d) to mixed questions    of law and fact. The panel majority read -- correctly, it turns out -- the Court's opinion to apply § 2254(d) only to historical facts. The panel majority held that § 2254(d) simply was not implicated in this case because there was no conflict     between its findings of historical facts and those of the California Court of Appeal. The disagreement today is whether that holding is correct. In my opinion, this question is more difficult than either the per curiam or JUSTICE BRENNAN's dissent indicates. *Link to the text of the note Indeed, the difficulty of the analysis behooves this Court either to "[point] the     way" in a more extensive and reasoned fashion or to rely upon the good faith and good sense of the federal courts in applying the rather straightforward principle of § 2254(d) even though in particular cases its application might be unclear. The Court does neither today. Instead, it merely delays, for the sake of a procedural nicety, either the habeas corpus relief to which the Court of Appeals has held the respondent is entitled or a consideration of the merits of the only significant question that the petitioner has raised. I respectfully dissent from the Court's summary    disposition.
