
The $ 39.9 million in dividend    income at issue in this case was earned by four foreign subsidiaries of F. W. Woolworth Co.: F. W. Woolworth GmbH (Germany), F. W. Woolworth, Ltd. (Canada), F. W. Woolworth, S. A. de C. V. Mexico (Mexico), and F. W. Woolworth Co., Ltd. (England). F. W. Woolworth Co. wholly owned its German, Canadian, and Mexican subsidiaries, and had a 52.7% interest in its English subsidiary. During the tax year in question the subsidiaries apparently operated somewhat autonomously in their respective markets, but "mail, telephone, and teletype communication between the upper echelons of management of the parent     and the subsidiaries" was "'frequent.'" Ante, at 368 (footnote omitted) (quoting App. to Juris. Statement 34a). Moreover, "[decisions] about major financial decisions, such as the amount of dividends to be paid by the subsidiaries and the creation of substantial debt, had to be approved by the     parent," and "Woolworth's published financial statements, such as its annual reports, were prepared on a consolidated basis." Ante, at 368-369 (citations and footnotes omitted).

These controlled subsidiaries, operating in geographically diverse markets in the same line    of business as F. W. Woolworth itself, were simply not "unrelated," 1Link to the text of the note "discrete business [enterprises]," 2Link to the text of the note "[having] nothing to do with the activities" 3Link to the text of the note of F. W. Woolworth in New Mexico. Because I disagree with the redefinition of the limits of a unitary business adopted today by the Court, and for the reasons expressed in my dissent in No. 80-2015, ASARCO Inc. v. Idaho State Tax Comm'n, ante, p. 331, which was argued in tandem with this case, I respectfully dissent.

1Link to the location of the note in the document
Mobil Oil Corp. v. Commissioner of Taxes of Vermont, 445 U.S. 425, 439 (1980).

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Exxon Corp. v. Wisconsin Dept. of Revenue, 447 U.S. 207, 224 (1980).

3Link to the location of the note in the document
Mobil Oil Corp. v. Commissioner of Taxes of Vermont, supra, at 442.
