
        
        Util. Air Regulatory Grp. v. EPA, 134 S. Ct. 2427 (2014)
        


      

Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Ginsburg, Justice Sotomayor, and Justice Kagan join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.

In Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497, 127 S. Ct. 1438, 167 L. Ed. 2d 248 (2007), we  [*2450]  held that greenhouse gases fall within the Clean Air Act’s general definition of the term “air pollutant,” 42 U.S.C. § 7602(g). 549 U.S., at 528-529, 127 S. Ct. 1438, 167 L. Ed. 2d 24. We also held, consequently, that the Environmental Protection Agency is empowered and required by Title II of the Act to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from mobile sources (such as cars and trucks) if it decides  [***53] that greenhouse gases “contribute to . . . air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare,” § 7521(a)(1). 549 U.S., at 532-533, 127 S. Ct. 1438, 167 L. Ed. 2d 24. The EPA determined that greenhouse gases endanger human health and welfare, 74 Fed. Reg. 66496 (2009) (Endangerment Finding), and so it issued regulations for mobile emissions, 75 Fed. Reg. 25324 (2010) (Tailpipe Rule).

These cases take as a given our decision in Massachusetts that the Act’s general definition of “air pollutant” includes greenhouse gases. One of the questions posed by these cases  [**401]  is whether those gases fall within the scope of the phrase “any air pollutant” as that phrase is used in the more specific provisions of the Act here at issue. The Court’s answer is “no.” Ante, at ___ - ___, 189 L. Ed. 2d, at 389-397. I disagree.

The Clean Air Act provisions at issue here are Title I’s Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) program, § 7470 et seq., and Title V’s permitting regime, § 7661 et seq. By contrast to Title II, Titles I and V apply to stationary sources, such as power plants and factories. Under the PSD program, “major emitting facilities” constructed in the United States must meet certain requirements, including obtaining a permit  [***54] that imposes emissions limitations, § 7475(a)(1), and using “the best available control technology for each pollutant subject to regulation under [the Act] emitted from” the facility, § 7475(a)(4). Title V requires each “major source” to obtain an operating permit. § 7661a(a).

These cases concern the definitions of “major emitting facility” and “major source,” each of which is defined to mean any stationary source that emits more than a threshold quantity of “any air pollutant.” See § 7479(1) (“major emitting facility”); §§ 7602(j), 7661(2)(B) (“major source”). To simplify the exposition, I will refer only to the PSD program and its definition of “major emitting facility”; a parallel analysis applies to Title V.

As it is used in the PSD provisions,

“[t]he term ‘major emitting facility’ means any of [a list of specific categories of] stationary sources of air pollutants which emit, or have the potential to emit, one hundred tons per year or more of any air pollutant . . . . Such term also includes any other source with the potential to emit two hundred and fifty tons per year or more of any air pollutant.” § 7479(1).

To simplify further, I will ignore the reference to specific types of source  [***55] that emit at least 100 tons per year (tpy) of any air pollutant. In effect, we are dealing with a statute that says that the PSD program’s regulatory requirements must be applied to

“any stationary source that has the potential to emit two hundred fifty tons per year or more of any air pollutant.”

The interpretive difficulty in these cases arises out of the definition’s use of the phrase “two hundred fifty tons per year or more,” which I will call the “250 tpy threshold.” When applied to greenhouse gases, 250 tpy is far too low a threshold. As the Court explains, tens of thousands of stationary sources emit large quantities of one greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide. See ante, at ___ - ___, 189 L. Ed. 2d, at 393-395, and n. 7. To apply the programs at issue here to all those  [*2451]  sources would be extremely expensive and burdensome, counterproductive, and perhaps impossible; it would also contravene Congress’s intent that the programs’ coverage be limited to those large sources whose emissions are substantial enough to justify the regulatory burdens. Ibid. The EPA recognized as much, and it addressed the problem by issuing a regulation—the Tailoring Rule—that purports to raise the coverage threshold for greenhouse gases from  [***56] the statutory figure of 250 tpy to 100,000 tpy in order to keep the programs’ coverage limited to “a relatively small number of large industrial sources.” 75 Fed. Reg. 31514, 31555 (2010); see id., at 31523-31524.

 [**402]  The Tailoring Rule solves the practical problems that would have been caused by the 250 tpy threshold. But what are we to do about the statute’s language? The statute specifies a definite number—250, not 100,000—and it says that facilities that are covered by that number must meet the program’s requirements. The statute says nothing about agency discretion to change that number. What is to be done? How, given the statute’s language, can the EPA exempt from regulation sources that emit more than 250 but less than 100,000 tpy of greenhouse gases (and that also do not emit other regulated pollutants at threshold levels)?

The Court answers by (1) pointing out that regulation at the 250 tpy threshold would produce absurd results, (2) refusing to read the statute as compelling such results, and (3) consequently interpreting the phrase “any air pollutant” as containing an implicit exception for greenhouse gases. (Emphasis added.) Put differently, the Court reads the statute as defining  [***57] “major emitting facility” to mean “stationary sources that have the potential to emit two hundred fifty tons per year or more of any air pollutant except for those air pollutants, such as carbon dioxide, with respect to which regulation at that threshold would be impractical or absurd or would sweep in smaller sources that Congress did not mean to cover.” See ante, at ___ - ___, 189 L. Ed. 2d, at 392 (“[T]here is no insuperable textual barrier to EPA’s interpreting ‘any air pollutant’ in the permitting triggers of PSD and Title V to encompass only pollutants emitted in quantities that enable them to be sensibly regulated at the statutory thresholds, and to exclude those atypical pollutants that, like greenhouse gases, are emitted in such vast quantities that their inclusion would radically transform those programs and render them unworkable as written”).

I agree with the Court that the word “any,” when used in a statute, does not normally mean “any in the universe.” Cf. FCC v. NextWave Personal Communications Inc., 537 U.S. 293, 311, 123 S. Ct. 832, 154 L. Ed. 2d 863 (2003) (Breyer, J., dissenting) (“‘Tell all customers that . . .’ does not refer to every customer of every business in the world”). Rather, “[g]eneral terms as used on particular  [***58] occasions often carry with them implied restrictions as to scope,” ibid., and so courts must interpret the word “any,” like all other words, in context. As Judge Learned Hand pointed out when interpreting another statute many years ago, “[w]e can best reach the meaning here, as always, by recourse to the underlying purpose, and, with that as a guide, by trying to project upon the specific occasion how we think persons, actuated by such a purpose, would have dealt with it, if it had been presented to them at the time.” Borella v. Borden Co., 145 F. 2d 63, 64 (CA2 1944). The pursuit of that underlying purpose may sometimes require us to “abandon” a “literal interpretation” of a word like “any.” Id., at 64-65.

 [*2452]  The law has long recognized that terms such as “any” admit of unwritten limitations and exceptions. Legal philosophers like to point out that a statute providing that “‘[w]hoever shall willfully take the life of another shall be punished by death’” need not encompass a man who kills in self-defense; nor must an ordinance imposing fines upon those who occupy a public parking spot for more than two hours penalize a driver who is unable  [**403]  to move because of a parade. See Fuller, The Case  [***59] of the Speluncean Explorers, 62 Harv. L. Rev. 616, 619, 624 (1949); see also United States v. Kirby, 74 U.S. 482, 7 Wall. 482, 485-487, 19 L. Ed. 278 (1869) (holding that a statute forbidding knowing and willful obstruction of the mail contains an implicit exception permitting a local sheriff to arrest a mail carrier). The maxim cessante ratione legis cessat ipse lex—where a law’s rationale ceases to apply, so does the law itself—is not of recent origin. See, e.g., Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S. 678, 699, 121 S. Ct. 2491, 150 L. Ed. 2d 653 (2001) (citing 1 E. Coke, Institutes *70b); Green v. Liter, 12 U.S. 229, 8 Cranch 229, 249, 3 L. Ed. 545 (1814) (Story, J.) (“cessante ratione, cessat ipsa lex”).

I also agree with the Court’s point that “a generic reference to air pollutants” in the Clean Air Act need not “encompass every substance falling within the Act-wide definition” that we construed in Massachusetts, § 7602(g). See ante, at ___ - ___, 189 L. Ed. 2d, at 390. As the Court notes, the EPA has interpreted the phrase “any air pollutant,” which is used several times in the Act, as limited to “air pollutants for which EPA has promulgated [new source performance standards]” in the portion of the Act dealing with those standards, as limited to “visibility-impairing air pollutants” in the part of the Act  [***60] concerned with deleterious effects on visibility, and as limited to “pollutants for which the area is designated nonattainment” in the part of the Act aimed at regions that fail to attain air quality standards. Ibid.

But I do not agree with the Court that the only way to avoid an absurd or otherwise impermissible result in these cases is to create an atextual greenhouse gas exception to the phrase “any air pollutant.” After all, the word “any” makes an earlier appearance in the definitional provision, which defines “major emitting facility” to mean “any . . . source with the potential to emit two hundred and fifty tons per year or more of any air pollutant.” § 7479(1) (emphasis added). As a linguistic matter, one can just as easily read an implicit exception for small-scale greenhouse gas emissions into the phrase “any source” as into the phrase “any air pollutant.” And given the purposes of the PSD program and the Act as a whole, as well as the specific roles of the different parts of the statutory definition, finding flexibility in “any source” is far more sensible than the Court’s route of finding it in “any air pollutant.”

The implicit exception I propose reads almost word for word  [***61] the same as the Court’s, except that the location of the exception has shifted. To repeat, the Court reads the definition of “major emitting facility” as if it referred to “any source with the potential to emit two hundred fifty tons per year or more of any air pollutant except for those air pollutants, such as carbon dioxide, with respect to which regulation at that threshold would be impractical or absurd or would sweep in smaller sources that Congress did not mean to cover.” I would simply move the implicit exception, which I’ve italicized, so that it applies to “source” rather than “air pollutant”: “any source with the potential to emit two hundred fifty tons per year or more of any air pollutant except for those sources, such as those emitting unmanageably small amounts of greenhouse gases,  [*2453]  with respect to which regulation at that threshold would be impractical or absurd or [**404]  would sweep in smaller sources that Congress did not mean to cover.”

From a legal, administrative, and functional perspective—that is, from a perspective that assumes that Congress was not merely trying to arrange words on paper but was seeking to achieve a real-world purpose—my way of reading the statute is  [***62] the more sensible one. For one thing, my reading is consistent with the specific purpose underlying the 250 tpy threshold specified by the statute. The purpose of that number was not to prevent the regulation of dangerous air pollutants that cannot be sensibly regulated at that particular threshold, though that is the effect that the Court’s reading gives the threshold. Rather, the purpose was to limit the PSD program’s obligations to larger sources while exempting the many small sources whose emissions are low enough that imposing burdensome regulatory requirements on them would be senseless.

Thus, the accompanying Senate Report explains that the PSD program “is reasonable and necessary for very large sources, such as new electrical generating plants or new steel mills. But the procedure would prove costly and potentially unreasonable if imposed on construction of storage facilities for a small gasoline jobber or on the construction of a new heating plant at a junior college.” S. Rep. No. 95-127, p. 96 (1977). And the principal sponsor of the Clean Air Act amendments at issue here, Senator Edmund Muskie, told the Senate that the program would not cover “houses, dairies, farms, highways,  [***63] hospitals, schools, grocery stores, and other such sources.” 123 Cong. Rec. 18013, 18021 (1977).

The EPA, exercising the legal authority to which it is entitled under Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1984), understood the threshold’s purpose in the same light. It explained that Congress’s objective was

“to limit the PSD program to large industrial sources because it was those sources that were the primary cause of the pollution problems in question and because those sources would have the resources to comply with the PSD requirements. Congress’s mechanism for limiting PSD was the 100/250 tpy threshold limitations. Focused as it was primarily on NAAQS pollutants [that is, those air pollutants for which the EPA has issued a national ambient air quality standard under Title I of the Act, see EPA v. EME Homer City Generation, L. P., 572 U.S. ___, ___, 134 S. Ct. 1584, 188 L. Ed. 2d 775, 782 (2014)], Congress considered sources that emit NAAQS pollutants in those quantities generally to be the large industrial sources to which it intended PSD to be limited.” Tailoring Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. 31555.

The Court similarly acknowledges that “the PSD program and Title V are designed  [***64] to apply to, and cannot rationally be extended beyond, a relative handful of large sources capable of shouldering heavy substantive and procedural burdens.” Ante, at ___, 189 L. Ed. 2d, at 393; see also Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F. 2d 323, 353, 204 U.S. App. D.C. 51 (CADC 1979) (“Congress’s intention was to identify facilities which, due to their size, are financially able to bear the substantial regulatory costs imposed by the PSD provisions and which, as a group, are  [**405]  primarily responsible for emission of the deleterious pollutants that befoul our nation’s air”).

An implicit source-related exception would serve this statutory purpose while going no further. The implicit exception that the Court reads into the phrase “any air pollutant,” by contrast, goes well beyond the limited congressional objective.  [*2454]  Nothing in the statutory text, the legislative history, or common sense suggests that Congress, when it imposed the 250 tpy threshold, was trying to undermine its own deliberate decision to use the broad language “any air pollutant” by removing some substances (rather than some facilities) from the PSD program’s coverage.

For another thing, a source-related exception serves the flexible nature of the Clean Air Act. We observed  [***65] in Massachusetts that “[w]hile the Congresses that drafted” the Act “might not have appreciated the possibility that burning fossil fuels could lead to global warming, they did understand that without regulatory flexibility, changing circumstances and scientific developments would soon render the Clean Air Act obsolete.” 549 U.S., at 532, 127 S. Ct. 1438, 167 L. Ed. 2d 24. We recognized that “[t]he broad language of” the Act-wide definition of “air pollutant” “reflects an intentional effort to confer the flexibility necessary to forestall such obsolescence.” Ibid.

The Court’s decision to read greenhouse gases out of the PSD program drains the Act of its flexibility and chips away at our decision in Massachusetts. What sense does it make to read the Act as generally granting the EPA the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions and then to read it as denying that power with respect to the programs for large stationary sources at issue here? It is anomalous to read the Act to require the EPA to regulate air pollutants that pose previously unforeseen threats to human health and welfare where “250 tons per year” is a sensible regulatory line but not where, by chemical or regulatory happenstance, a higher line must  [***66] be drawn. And it is anomalous to read an unwritten exception into the more important phrase of the statutory definition (“any air pollutant”) when a similar unwritten exception to less important language (the particular number used by the statute) will do just as well. The implicit exception preferred by the Court produces all of these anomalies, while the source-related exception I propose creates none of them.

In addition, the interpretation I propose leaves the EPA with the sort of discretion as to interstitial matters that Congress likely intended it to retain. My interpretation gives the EPA nothing more than the authority to exempt sources from regulation insofar as the Agency reasonably determines that applying the PSD program to them would expand the program so much as to contravene Congress’s intent. That sort of decision, which involves the Agency’s technical expertise and administrative experience, is the kind of decision that Congress typically leaves to the agencies to make. Cf. Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U.S. 212, 222, 122 S. Ct. 1265, 152 L. Ed. 2d 330 (2002) (enumerating factors that we take to indicate that Congress intends the agency to exercise the discretion provided by Chevron). To read the Act to grant  [***67] that discretion here is to read it as furthering Congress’s (and the public’s) interest in more effective, less wasteful regulation.

 [**406]  Last, but by no means least, a source-related exception advances the Act’s overall purpose. That broad purpose, as set forth at the beginning of the statute, is “to protect and enhance the quality of the Nation’s air resources so as to promote the public health and welfare and the productive capacity of its population.” § 7401(b)(1); see also § 7470(1) (A purpose of the PSD program in particular is “to protect public health and welfare from any actual or potential adverse effect which in the Administrator’s judgment may reasonably be anticipate[d] to occur from air pollution”); § 7602(h) (“All language [in the Act] referring to effects on welfare includes . . . effects on . . . weather  [*2455]  . . . and climate”). The expert agency charged with administering the Act has determined in its Endangerment Finding that greenhouse gases endanger human health and welfare, and so sensible regulation of industrial emissions of those pollutants is at the core of the purpose behind the Act. The broad “no greenhouse gases” exception that the Court reads into the statute unnecessarily  [***68] undercuts that purpose, while my narrow source-related exception would leave the Agency with the tools it needs to further it.



***
I agree with the Court’s holding that stationary sources that are subject to the PSD program because they emit other (non-greenhouse-gas) pollutants in quantities above the statutory threshold—those facilities that the Court refers to as “anyway” sources—must meet the “best available control technology” requirement of § 7475(a)(4) with respect to greenhouse gas emissions. I therefore join Part II-B-2 of the Court’s opinion. But as for the Court’s holding that the EPA cannot interpret the language at issue here to cover facilities that emit more than 100,000 tpy of greenhouse gases by virtue of those emissions, I respectfully dissent.

