


135 S.Ct. 1318
Supreme Court of the United States
OMNICARE, INC., et al., Petitioners
v.
LABORERS DISTRICT COUNCIL CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY PENSION FUND et al.
No. 13–435.
|
Argued Nov. 3, 2014.
|
Decided March 24, 2015.
Justice SCALIA, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933 imposes liability where a registration statement “contain[s] an untrue statement of a material fact” or “omit[s] to state a material fact necessary to make the statements therein not misleading.” 15 U.S.C. § 77k(a). I agree with the Court’s discussion of what it means for an expression of *1334 opinion to state an untrue material fact. But an expression of opinion implies facts (beyond the fact that the speaker believes his opinion) only where a reasonable listener would understand it to do so. And it is only when expressions of opinion do imply these other facts that they can be “misleading” without the addition of other “material facts.” The Court’s view would count far more expressions of opinion to convey collateral facts than I—or the common law—would, and I therefore concur only in part.
 
The common law recognized that most listeners hear “I believe,” “in my estimation,” and other related phrases as disclaiming the assertion of a fact. Hence the (somewhat overbroad) common-law rule that a plaintiff cannot establish a misrepresentation claim “for misstatements of opinion, as distinguished from those of fact.” W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on Torts § 109, p. 755 (5th ed. 1984) (Prosser & Keeton). A fraudulent misrepresentation claim based on an expression of opinion could lie for the one fact the opinion reliably conveyed: that the speaker in fact held the stated opinion. Restatement of Torts § 525, Comment c, p. 60 (1938). And, in some circumstances, the common law acknowledged that an expression of opinion reasonably implied “that the maker knows of no fact incompatible with his opinion.” Id. § 539(1), at 91. The no-facts-incompatible-with-the-opinion standard was a demanding one; it meant that a speaker’s judgment had to “var[y] so far from the truth that no reasonable man in his position could have such an opinion.” Restatement of Contracts § 474(b), p. 902, and Comment b (1932). But without more, a listener could only reasonably interpret expressions of opinion as conveying this limited assurance of a speaker’s understanding of facts.
 
In a few areas, the common law recognized the possibility that a listener could reasonably infer from an expression of opinion not only (1) that the speaker sincerely held it, and (2) that the speaker knew of no facts incompatible with the opinion, but also (3) that the speaker had a reasonable basis for holding the opinion. This exceptional recognition occurred only where it was “very reasonable or probable” that a listener should place special confidence in a speaker’s opinion. Prosser & Keeton § 109, at 760–761. This included two main categories, both of which were carve-outs from the general rule that “the ordinary man has a reasonable competence to form his own opinion,” and “is not justified in relying [on] the ... opinion” of another. Restatement of Torts § 542, Comment a, at 95. First, expressions of opinion made in the context of a relationship of trust, such as between doctors and patients. Second, expressions of opinion made by an expert in his capacity as an expert (for example, a jeweler’s statement of opinion about the value of a diamond). These exceptions allowed a listener to deal with those special expressions of opinion as though they were facts. As the leading treatise put it, “the ordinary man is free to deal in reliance upon the opinion of an expert jeweler as to the value of a diamond [or] of an attorney upon a point of law.” Prosser & Keeton § 109, at 761. But what reasonable person would assume that a lawyer’s assessment of a diamond or a jeweler’s opinion on a point of law implied an educated investigation?
 
The Court’s expansive application of § 11’s omissions clause to expressions of opinion produces a far broader field of misrepresentation; in fact, it produces almost the opposite of the common-law rule. The Court holds that a reasonable investor is right to expect a reasonable basis for all opinions in registration statements—for example, the conduct of a “meaningful ... *1335 inquiry,”—unless that is sufficiently disclaimed. Ante, at 1328 – 1329, 1330 – 1331, 1332 – 1333. Take the Court’s hypothetical opinion regarding legal compliance. When a disclosure statement says “we believe our conduct is lawful,” ante, at 1328, the Court thinks this should be understood to suggest that a lawyer was consulted, since a reasonable investigation on this point would require consulting a lawyer. But this approach is incompatible with the common law, which had no “legal opinions are different” exception. See Restatement of Torts § 545, at 102.
 
It is also incompatible with common sense. It seems to me strange to suggest that a statement of opinion as generic as “we believe our conduct is lawful” conveys the implied assertion of fact “we have conducted a meaningful legal investigation before espousing this opinion.” It is strange to ignore the reality that a director might rely on industry practice, prior experience, or advice from regulators—rather than a meaningful legal investigation—in concluding the firm’s conduct is lawful. The effect of the Court’s rule is to adopt a presumption of expertise on all topics volunteered within a registration statement.
 
It is reasonable enough to adopt such a presumption for those matters that are required to be set forth in a registration statement. Those are matters on which the management of a corporation are experts. If, for example, the registration statement said “we believe that the corporation has $5,000,000 cash on hand,” or “we believe the corporation has 7,500 shares of common stock outstanding,” the public is entitled to assume that the management has done the necessary research, so that the asserted “belief” is undoubtedly correct. But of course a registration statement would never preface such items, within the expertise of the management, with a “we believe that.” Full compliance with the law, however, is another matter. It is not specifically required to be set forth in the statement, and when management prefaces that volunteered information with a “we believe that,” it flags the fact that this is not within our area of expertise, but we think we are in compliance.
 
Moreover, even if one assumes that a corporation issuing a registration statement is (by operation of law) an “expert” with regard to all matters stated or opined about, I would still not agree with the Court’s disposition. The Court says the following:
“Section 11’s omissions clause, as applied to statements of both opinion and fact, necessarily brings the reasonable person into the analysis, and asks what she would naturally understand a statement to convey beyond its literal meaning. And for expressions of opinion, that means considering the foundation she would expect an issuer to have before making the statement.” Ante, at 1332 (emphasis added).
The first sentence is true enough—but “what she [the reasonable (female) person, and even he, the reasonable (male) person] would naturally understand a statement [of opinion] to convey” is not that the statement has the foundation she (the reasonable female person) considers adequate. She is not an expert, and is relying on the advice of an expert—who ought to know how much “foundation” is needed. She would naturally understand that the expert has conducted an investigation that he (or she or it) considered adequate. That is what relying upon the opinion of an expert means.
 
The common law understood this distinction. An action for fraudulent misrepresentation based on an opinion of an *1336 expert* was only allowed when the expression of the opinion conveyed a fact—the “fact” that summarized the expert’s knowledge. Prosser and Keeton § 109, at 761. And a fact was actionable only if the speaker knew it was false, if he knew he did not know it, or if he knew the listener would understand the statement to have a basis that the speaker knew was not true. Restatement of Torts § 526, at 63–64. Ah!, the majority might say, so a speaker is liable for knowing he lacks the listener’s reasonable basis! If the speaker knows—is actually aware—that the listener will understand an expression of opinion to have a specific basis that it does not have, then of course he satisfies this element of the tort.
 
But more often, when any basis is implied at all, both sides will understand that the speaker implied a “reasonable basis,” but honestly disagree on what that means. And the common law supplied a solution for this: A speaker was liable for ambiguous statements—misunderstandings—as fraudulent misrepresentations only where he both knew of the ambiguity and intended that the listener fall prey to it. Id. § 527, at 66. In other words, even assuming both parties knew (a prerequisite to liability) that the expression of opinion implied a “reasonable investigation,” if the speaker and listener honestly disagreed on the nature of that investigation, the speaker was not liable for a fraudulent misrepresentation unless he subjectively intended the deception. And so in no circumstance would the listener’s belief of a “reasonable basis” control: If the speaker subjectively believes he lacks a reasonable basis, then his statement is simply a knowing misrepresentation. Id. § 526(a), at 63. If he does not know of the ambiguity, or knows of it, but does not intend to deceive, he is not liable. Id. § 527, at 66. That his basis for belief was “objectively unreasonable” does not impart liability, so long as the belief was genuine.
 
This aligns with common sense. When a client receives advice from his lawyer, it is surely implicit in that advice that the lawyer has conducted a reasonable investigation—reasonable, that is, in the lawyer’s estimation. The client is relying on the expert lawyer’s judgment for the amount of investigation necessary, no less than for the legal conclusion. To be sure, if the lawyer conducts an investigation that he does not believe is adequate, he would be liable for misrepresentation. And if he conducts an investigation that he believes is adequate but is objectively unreasonable (and reaches an incorrect result), he may be liable for malpractice. But on the latter premise he is not liable for misrepresentation; all that was implicit in his advice was that he had conducted an investigation he deemed adequate. To rely on an expert’s opinion is to rely on the expert’s evaluation of how much time to spend on the question at hand.
 
The objective test proposed by the Court—inconsistent with the common law and common intuitions about statements of opinion—invites roundabout attacks upon expressions of opinion. Litigants seeking recompense for a corporation’s expression of belief that turned out, after the fact, to be incorrect can always charge that even though the belief rested upon an investigation *1337 the corporation thought to be adequate, the investigation was not “objectively adequate.”
 
Nor is this objective test justified by § 11’s absence of a mens rea requirement, as the Court suggests. Ante, at 1330 n. 10. Some of my citation of the common law is meant to illustrate when a statement of opinion contains an implied warranty of reasonable basis. But when it does so, the question then becomes whose reasonable basis. My illustration of the common-law requirements for misrepresentation is meant to show that a typical listener assumes that the speaker’s reasonable basis controls. That showing is not contradicted by § 11’s absence of a mens rea requirement.
 
Not to worry, says the Court. Sellers of securities need “only divulge an opinion’s basis, or else make clear the real tentativeness of [their] belief [s].” Ante, at 1332. One wonders what the function of “in my estimation” is, then, except as divulging such hesitation. Or what would be sufficient for the Court. “In my highly tentative estimation?” “In my estimation that, consistent with Omnicare, should be understood as an opinion only?” Reasonable speakers do not speak this way, and reasonable listeners do not receive opinions this way. When an expert expresses an opinion instead of stating a fact, it implies (1) that he genuinely believes the opinion, (2) that he believes his basis for the opinion is sufficient, and (most important) (3) that he is not certain of his result. Nothing more. This approach would have given lower courts and investors far more guidance and would largely have avoided the Funds’ attack upon Omnicare’s opinions as though Omnicare held those opinions out to be facts.
 
I therefore concur only in part and in the judgment.
 


*
At the time of the Act's passage, the common law did not permit suit for negligent misrepresentation under the circumstances here. An action for negligent misrepresentation resting upon a statement of opinion would lie only if the opinion—a professional opinion—was “given upon facts equally well known to both the supplier and the recipient.” Restatement of Torts § 552, Comment b, at 123 (1938). That is of course not the situation here. The typical opinion “given upon facts equally known to both the supplier and the recipient” is a lawyer's legal advice on facts described by his client.


