
        
        Brennan v. Armstrong, 433 U.S. 672, 97 S. Ct. 2907 (1977)
        


      

MR. JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN AND @MR. JUSTICE MARSHALL join, dissenting.

My concern over the Court's misuse of summary dispositions prompts this dissent.

The Court's explanation of its action gives the erroneous impression that the Court of Appeals' decision related to the question of what kind of remedy is appropriate in this case. Quite the contrary, there was no remedy issue before the Court of Appeals, and that court considered no such issue.

The District Court concluded in a 60-page opinion that "school authorities engaged in practices with the intent and for the purpose of creating and maintaining a segregated school system, and that such practices had the effect of causing current conditions of segregation in the Milwaukee public schools." Amos v. Board of School Directors, 408 F.Supp. 765, 818 (ED Wis. 1976). Recognizing that "remedial efforts may well be for naught if the determination of liability is ultimately reversed on appeal," id., at 824, Judge Reynolds certified this issue of law for interlocutory appeal. To further ensure appealability, he entered a general order enjoining future racial discrimination and directing [****4]  the defendants to formulate desegregation plans. App. 140-141. This order did not call for any particular kind of desegregation plan. Thus,  [*674]  when the case reached the Court of Appeals, the only issue before it was the existence of a violation. 1Link to the text of the note After a careful review of the evidence, it concluded that the District Court's finding of intentional segregation was not clearly erroneous. 539 F.2d 625 (CA7 1976).

This Court now vacates the Court of Appeals judgment and remands for reconsideration in light of two cases. One of those cases 2Link to the text of the note is merely a routine application of Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, which was correctly  [***1047]  construed by the Court of Appeals. 3Link to the text of the note The other case is relevant to the issue of liability, if at all, only because it supports the Court of Appeals. 4Link to the text of the note

 [****5]  Of course, in formulating a remedy, the District Court will need to consider case such as Milliken v. Bradley, ante, p. 267, and Dayton Board of Education v. Brinkman, ante, p. 406, if there is any dispute about the proper scope of the remedy. But since no such issue has ever been decided by the Court of Appeals, there is nothing for it to reconsider in light of these cases. These cases certainly provide no justification for vacating the judgment affirming the District Court's conclusion that the petitioners have violated the Constitution.  [**2909]  This Court's hasty action will unfortunately lead to unnecessary  [*675]  work by already overburdened Circuit Judges, who have given this case far more study than this Court had time to give it. Nevertheless, it is quite clear that after respectful reconsideration the Court of Appeals remains free to re-enter its original judgment.

In my opinion the petition for certiorari should be denied. However, since the Court has granted the petition, and since it is not our practice to review findings of fact which the Court of Appeals has already determined to be supported by the record, I would affirm the [****6]  judgment.

After the case was argued in the Court of Appeals on June 2, 1976 (see 539 F.2d 625), the District Court entered a broader remedy. App. 142, 144.

2Link to the location of the note in the document
Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
The Court of Appeals cited Washington v. Davis as holding that "a 'racially discriminatory purpose' is essential to an equal protection violation in school cases, as in other cases," and that "[p]urpose may… be inferred from 'the totality of the relevant facts,' which may include discriminatory impact," 539 F.2d, at 633-634, quoting Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S., at 242.

4Link to the location of the note in the document
Dayton Board of Education v. Brinkman, ante, p. 406, is primarily a remedy case and therefore irrelevant to the action of the Court of Appeals in this case. It does, however, stress the limitations on appellate review in this area, such as the "clearly erroneous" rule, ante, at 417, which the Court of Appeals scrupulously followed, e.g., 539 F.2d, at 637.

