
When Dart removed this class action to federal court, it was required to file a “notice of removal” containing “a short and plain statement of the grounds for removal.” 28 U.S.C. § 1446(a). In accordance with what it thought to be Tenth Circuit jurisprudence, the District Court interpreted this to require evidence (as opposed to mere allegations) supporting federal jurisdiction. After finding that Dart’s notice of removal did not include evidence of the jurisdictionally required amount in controversy, the District Court remanded the case to state court. App. to Pet. for Cert. 25a–28a. Dart sought permission to appeal this order under § 1453(c)(1), which provides that “a court of appeals may accept an appeal from an order of a district court granting or denying a motion to remand a class action to the State court from which it was removed” (emphasis added). Without stating its reasons, the Tenth Circuit issued an order denying Dart’s request. App. to Pet. for Cert. 13a.
 
Eager to correct what we suspected was the District Court’s (and the Tenth Circuit’s) erroneous interpretation of § 1446(a), we granted certiorari to decide whether notices of removal must contain evidence supporting federal jurisdiction. After briefing we discovered a little snag: This case does not present that question. Because we are reviewing the Tenth Circuit’s judgment, the only question before us is whether the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion in denying Dart permission to appeal the District Court’s remand order. Once we found out that the issue presented differed from the issue we granted certiorari to review, the responsible course *559 would have been to confess error and to dismiss the case as improvidently granted.
 
The Court, however, insists on deciding whether the District Court erred in remanding this case to state court. How can it do that, one might ask, when the only issue in this case concerns the propriety of the Tenth Circuit’s rejection of Dart’s appeal? The Court hits upon a solution: It concludes that the Tenth Circuit decided not to hear the appeal because it agreed with the District Court’s analysis. Attributing the District Court’s reasoning to the Tenth Circuit allows the Court to pretend to review the appellate court’s exercise of discretion while actually reviewing the trial court’s legal analysis.
 
There are problems with this approach that are, in a rational world, insuperable. To begin with, the Tenth Circuit’s short order does not tell us why it decided not to hear Dart’s appeal. It might have done so for an impermissible reason—for example, agreement with the District Court’s legal reasoning. But it might instead have done so for countless other, permissible, reasons—for example, a concern that this would be a poor vehicle for deciding the issue presented by Dart’s appeal, or a concern regarding the court’s ability to quickly resolve the issue, see § 1453(c)(2)–(3) (providing that appeals accepted under § 1453(c)(1) must be decided within 60 days, absent consent of the parties, with a 10–day extension for “good cause shown and in the interests of justice”).
 
Not long ago we held, unanimously, that “[a]n appellate court should not presume that a district court intended an incorrect legal result when the order is equally susceptible of a correct reading, particularly when the applicable standard of review is deferential.” Sprint/United Management Co. v. Mendelsohn, 552 U.S. 379, 386, 128 S.Ct. 1140, 170 L.Ed.2d 1 (2008). There, we corrected the Tenth Circuit for doing precisely what the Court itself does today in reviewing (deferentially) the Tenth Circuit’s denial of permission to appeal: presuming that the lower court adopted a legally erroneous argument advanced by one party. Id., at 384–385, 128 S.Ct. 1140. We explained to the Tenth Circuit that “it would be inappropriate for the reviewing court to assume, absent indication in the District Court’s opinion, that the lower court adopted a party’s incorrect argument.” Id., at 385, n. 2, 128 S.Ct. 1140 (emphasis added). Today, however, this Court blatantly violates that rule.
 
The only “indication in the opinion” that the Court relies on is the following language from the order denying permission to appeal: “Upon careful consideration of [1] the parties’ submissions, as well as [2] the applicable law, the Petition [for permission to appeal the remand order] is denied.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 13a–14a. This, the Court tells us, means the Tenth Circuit must have denied Dart’s petition because it agreed with the District Court’s legal conclusion. Of course it means no such thing.
 
As for point [1], considering a submission is not the same thing as agreeing with that submission. Worse still, correctness of the District Court’s opinion was not the only ground that Owens’ brief in the Tenth Circuit urged to support denial of the petition for review. It noted, for example, that the case addressed the general removal statute, § 1446(a), and so did not involve a question unique to the Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 (CAFA). Response to Petition for Permission to Appeal in No. 13–603, p. 3. (The Tenth Circuit considers “the presence of an important CAFA-related question” a reason to accept an appeal. BP America, Inc. v. Oklahoma ex rel. Edmondson, 613 F.3d 1029, 1034 (2010) (internal quotation marks omitted).)
 
*560 As for point [2], there is no reason whatever to believe that the only “applicable law” the Tenth Circuit considered and relied on was the law relating to the correctness of the District Court’s decision—i.e., the law interpreting § 1446(a). After all, the “applicable law” surely includes the law applicable to the disposition of petitions to appeal, § 1453(c)(1), and that body of law includes countless reasons to deny permission to appeal that are unrelated to the merits of the underlying district court judgment. “Applicable law” would allow the Tenth Circuit, for example, to deny permission to appeal for reasons not mentioned in the parties’ briefing. It would allow it to deny permission because it would be unable to resolve the issue within 60 days, as required by CAFA (absent an extension). § 1453(c)(2) and (c)(3); see also 730 F.3d 1234, 1238 (Hartz, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc) (“It will always be tempting for very busy judges to deny review of a knotty matter that requires a decision in short order”). And “applicable law” would permit numerous other grounds for denial, including those applied by this Court in denying petitions for certiorari. There is, to tell the truth, absolutely nothing in the Tenth Circuit’s order to suggest that it relied on the unlawful ground that the Court eagerly attributes to it, rather than one of many possible lawful grounds. Thus, as we said in Mendelsohn, “it would be inappropriate for the reviewing court [us] to assume ... that the lower court adopted a party’s incorrect argument.” 552 U.S., at 385, n. 2, 128 S.Ct. 1140.
 
Besides relying on the utterly uninformative language of the order, the Court makes one other attempt to demonstrate that the Tenth Circuit’s order was based upon its agreement with the holding of the District Court. It asserts that denying Dart permission to appeal “froz[e] in place” the District Court’s rule. Ante, at 556. In light of that denial, the Court says, any “responsible attorney” will include evidence supporting jurisdiction in his notice of removal, thereby eliminating the risk of having that notice held improper for the reason given by the District Court in this case. As a result, the Tenth Circuit will likely never again be presented with the question whether evidence of jurisdiction must be included with a notice of removal. Ibid. The Court then notes that, among the many factors the Tenth Circuit considers in deciding whether to accept an appeal under § 1453(c)(1), is whether the case presents an issue which, if not resolved in that appeal, will “leave the ambit of the federal courts for good.” BP America, supra, at 1035. One would have thought that this factor, if it controlled the Tenth Circuit’s denial, means that the Tenth Circuit did not agree with the Court’s perception that this issue will not likely reappear. The Court, however, says (quite illogically) that it means the Tenth Circuit must have agreed with the District Court’s incorrect legal analysis. It is hard to imagine a more obvious non sequitur.
 
And the argument not only tortures logic, it also distorts reality, resting as it does on the premise that henceforth no “responsible attorney” will fail to include evidence supporting federal jurisdiction in a notice of removal. Even discounting the existence of irresponsible attorneys, but see, e.g., Maples v. Thomas, 565 U.S. ––––, 132 S.Ct. 912, 181 L.Ed.2d 807 (2012), responsible attorneys, and even responsible judges, sometimes make mistakes, see, e.g., 572 U.S. ––––, 134 S.Ct. 1788, 188 L.Ed.2d 757 (2014) (order granting certiorari in this case). Indeed, Dart’s own (seemingly responsible) lawyers failed to include evidence supporting federal jurisdiction, despite what they argue is Circuit precedent supporting the District Court’s holding. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 12 (counsel *561 for Dart, explaining that the District Court’s ruling was supported by Tenth Circuit precedent).
 
Even in the legal utopia imagined by the Court—a world in which all lawyers are responsible and no lawyers make mistakes—it is easy to imagine ways in which the issue could come back to the circuit court. If, for example, a party appealed a district court decision addressing the sufficiency of the jurisdictional evidence, the Tenth Circuit could accept the appeal and hold (en banc, if necessary) that no evidence is required at all. In short, it is impossible to credit the suggestion (irrelevant in any case) that the chances of this issue arising again were “slim.” Ante, at 556.
 
The Court attempts to bolster its conclusion with an unprincipled and unequal application of the waiver doctrine. Owens, it says, by failing to brief the argument that the Tenth Circuit denied Dart’s petition for reasons other than its agreement with the District Court’s decision, waived that argument. Ante, at 557 (citing this Court’s Rule 15.2). Dart, however, never made an argument that would have called for such a response. It never argued that the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion in denying permission to appeal. Aside from one stray assertion on the final page of its reply brief, its briefing focused entirely on whether the District Court erred in remanding the case to state court. See, e.g., Brief for Petitioners 9 (“This Court should reverse the district court’s order remanding the case to state court”). Rather than hold Dart responsible for failing to argue that the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion, see Republic of Argentina v. NML Capital, Ltd., 573 U.S. ––––, ––––, n. 2, 134 S.Ct. 2250, 2255 n. 2, 189 L.Ed.2d 234 (2014) (“We will not revive a forfeited argument simply because the petitioner gestures toward it in its reply brief”), the Court makes the argument on Dart’s behalf and then takes Owens to task for failing to refute it. This Court ought not embrace such an oddhanded application of waiver principles.
 
The Court answers that Dart “had no cause to address” whether the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion until the issue was raised in Public Citizen’s amicus brief. Ante, at 555, n. 3. Not good enough. First, parties always have “cause to address” issues on which their entitlement to relief depends. Second, and more important, Public Citizen filed its amicus brief after both sides had already filed their merits briefs. So if the timing of that brief excuses Dart’s failure to address whether the Tenth Circuit abused its discretion, it should excuse Owens’ failure as well.
 
I come, finally, to the Court’s stinging observation that I joined the majority opinion in Standard Fire Ins. Co. v. Knowles, 568 U.S. ––––, 133 S.Ct. 1345, 185 L.Ed.2d 439 (2013)—a case that arose in the same posture as this one, but that was resolved without reference to the question whether the appellate court abused its discretion. Ante, at 555, n. 2. Of course Knowles did not address whether denials of permission to appeal under § 1453(c)(1) are to be reviewed for abuse of discretion—which is why today’s majority cannot cite it as precedent. See Brecht v. Abrahamson, 507 U.S. 619, 630–631, 113 S.Ct. 1710, 123 L.Ed.2d 353 (1993). As for my own culpability in overlooking the issue, I must accept that and will take it with me to the grave. But its irrelevance to my vote in the present case has been well expressed by Justice Jackson, in a passage quoted by the author of today’s opinion: “I see no reason why I should be consciously wrong today because I was unconsciously wrong yesterday.” *562 Massachusetts v. United States, 333 U.S. 611, 639–640, 68 S.Ct. 747, 92 L.Ed. 968 (1948) (dissenting opinion), quoted in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., 573 U.S. ––––, ––––, n. 11, 134 S.Ct. 2751, 2793 n. 11, 189 L.Ed.2d 675 (2014) (GINSBURG, J., dissenting).
 
* * *
 
Instead of correcting an erroneous district court opinion at the expense of an erroneous Supreme Court opinion, I would have dismissed this case as improvidently granted. Failing that, my vote is to affirm the Court of Appeals, since we have absolutely no basis for concluding that it abused its discretion.
 




