
I write separately to emphasize that a failure to find pre-emption here would subject self-insured health plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), 88 Stat. 829, as amended, 29 U. S. C. §1001 et seq., to 50 or more potentially conflicting information reporting requirements. Doing so is likely to create serious administrative problems. The Court points out that the respondent’s plan provides benefits to over 80,000 individuals living in 50 different States. See ante, at ___, 194 L. Ed. 2d, at 29. In addition, amici curiae tell us that self-insured, ERISA-based health plans provide benefits to 93 million Americans. Brief for American Benefits Council et al. as Amici Curiae 8. If each State is free to go its own way, each independently determining what information each plan must provide about benefits, the result could well be unnecessary, duplicative, and conflicting reporting requirements, any of which can mean increased confusion and increased    cost. Private standard setting can of course help alleviate these problems, but given the large number of different possible regulations, I do not believe that is sufficient. Cf. A. Costello & M. Taylor, APCD Council & NAHDO, Standardization of Data Collection in All-Payer Claims Databases 3-4 (Jan. 2011), online at https:// www.apcdcouncil.org / publication/standardization-data-collection-all-payer-claims-databases (as last visited Feb. 26, 2016).

I would also emphasize that pre-emption does not necessarily prevent Vermont or other States from obtaining the self-insured, ERISA-based health-plan information that they need. States wishing to obtain information can ask the Federal Government for appropriate approval. As the majority points out, the “Secretary of Labor has authority to establish additional reporting and disclosure requirements     for ERISA plans.” Ante, at ___, 194 L. Ed. 2d, at 32; see 29 U. S. C. §1135. Moreover, the Secretary “is authorized to undertake research and surveys and in connection therewith to collect, compile, analyze and publish data, information, and statistics relating to employee benefit plans, including retirement, deferred compensation, and welfare plans.” §1143(a)(1). At least one other important statute    provides the Secretary of Health and Human Services with similar authority. See 42 U. S. C. §300gg-17(a) (part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act that is applicable to group health insurance plans including ERISA plans); Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 4 (the Department of Labor, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the Department of Treasury are “currently considering a rulemaking to require health plans to report more detailed information about various aspects of plan administration, such as enrollment, claims processing, and benefit offerings”).

I see no reason why the Secretary of Labor could not develop reporting requirements     that satisfy the States’ needs, including some State-specific requirements, as appropriate. Nor do I see why the Department could not delegate to a particular State the authority to obtain data related to that State, while also providing the data to the Federal Secretary for use by other States or at the federal level.

Although the need for federal approval or authorization limits to some degree the States’ power to obtain information, requiring that approval has considerable advantages. The federal agencies are more likely to be informed about,    and to understand, ERISA-related consequences and health-care needs from a national perspective. Their involvement may consequently secure for the States necessary information without unnecessarily creating costly conflicts — particularly when compared with such alternatives as giving each State free rein to go its own way or asking nonexpert federal courts to try to iron out, regulation by regulation, such conflicts. Cf. Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U. S. 470, 506, 116 S. Ct. 2240, 135 L. Ed. 2d 700 (1996) (Breyer, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (reading a complex, ambiguous regulatory statute to permit “informed agency involvement” is more likely to achieve Congress’ general objectives).

For these reasons, and others that the majority sets forth, I agree that Vermont’s statute is pre-empted because it “interferes with nationally uniform plan administration.” Egelhoff v. Egelhoff, 532 U. S. 141, 148, 121 S. Ct. 1322, 149 L. Ed. 2d 264 (2001).
