
Chief Justice Finney dissented. "The overriding principle to be drawn from [Simmons]," he stated, "is that    due process is violated when a jury's speculative misunderstanding about a capital defendant's parole eligibility is allowed to go uncorrected." 340 S.C. at 310, 531 S.E.2d at 534. Due process mandates reversal here, he concluded, because "the jury's inquiry prompted a misleading response which suggested parole was a possibility." Ibid. Moreover, Chief Justice Finney added, when "a capital jury inquires about parole," 340 S.C. at 310, n. 2, 531 S. E. 2d at 534, n. 2, even if the question "is simply one of policy, as the majority suggests [it is], then why not adopt a policy which gives the jurors the simple truth: no parole." 340 U.S. at 311, 531 S.E.2d at 534.   

We granted certiorari, 530 U.S. 1306 (2000), to determine whether the South Carolina Supreme Court properly held Simmons inapplicable to the State's current sentencing regime.     We conclude that South Carolina's Supreme Court misinterpreted Simmons, and we therefore reverse that court's judgment.

II

South Carolina has consistently refused to inform the jury of a capital defendant's parole eligibility status. 4Link to the text of the note We first confronted this practice in Simmons.     The South Carolina sentencing scheme then in effect, S. C. Code Ann. §§ 16-3-20(A) and 24-21-610 (Supp. 1993), did not categorically preclude parole for capital defendants sentenced to life imprisonment, see supra, at 8-9, n. 3. Simmons, however, was parole ineligible under that scheme because of prior convictions for crimes of violence. See § 24-21-640; Simmons, 512 U.S. at 156 (plurality opinion); id. at 176 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment). Simmons' jury, in a note to the judge during the penalty phase deliberations, asked: "Does the imposition of a life sentence carry with it the possibility of parole?" Id. at 160 (plurality opinion). Over defense counsel's objection, the trial judge in Simmons instructed: "Do not consider parole or parole eligibility [in reaching your     verdict]. That is not a proper issue for your consideration." Ibid. After receiving this response from the court, Simmons' jury returned a sentence of death, which Simmons unsuccessfully sought to overturn on appeal to the South Carolina Supreme Court. Id. at 160-161.

    Mindful of the "longstanding practice of parole availability," 512 U.S. at 177 (O'CONNOR, J.), we recognized that Simmons' jury, charged to chose between death and life imprisonment, may have been misled. Given no clear definition of "life imprisonment" and told not to consider parole eligibility, that jury "reasonably     may have believed that [Simmons] could be released on parole if he were not executed." 512 U.S. at 161 (plurality opinion); see 512 U.S. at 177-178 (O'CONNOR, J.). It did not comport with due process, we held, for the State to "secure a death sentence on the ground, at least in part, of [defendant's] future dangerousness, while at the same time concealing from the sentencing jury the true meaning of its [only] noncapital sentencing alternative, namely, that life imprisonment meant life without parole." 512 U.S. at 162 (plurality opinion); see 512 U.S. at 178 (O'CONNOR, J.) ("Where the State     puts the defendant's future dangerousness in issue, and the only available alternative sentence to death is life imprisonment without possibility of parole, due process entitles the defendant to inform the capital sentencing jury -- by either argument or instruction -- that    he is parole ineligible.").

LEdHN   As earlier stated, see supra, at 8-9, the South Carolina Supreme Court held Simmons "inapplicable under the [State's] new sentencing scheme," 340 S.C. at 298, 531 S.E.2d at 528.Simmons is not triggered the South Carolina court said, unless life without parole is "the only legally available sentence alternative to death." Ibid. Currently, the court observed, when a capital case jury begins its sentencing deliberations, three alternative sentences are available: "1) death, 2) life without the possibility of parole, or 3) a mandatory minimum thirty year sentence." Ibid. "Since one of these alternatives to     death [is] not life without the possibility of parole," the court concluded, Simmons no longer constrains capital sentencing in South Carolina. 340 S.C. at 299, 531 S.E.2d at 528.

This reasoning might be persuasive if the jury's sentencing discretion encompassed the three choices the South Carolina court identified. But, that is not how the State's new scheme works. See supra, at 2-3. Under the law now governing, in any case in which the jury does not unanimously find a statutory aggravator,     death is not a permissible sentence and Simmons has no relevance. In such a case, the judge alone becomes the sentencer. S. C. Code Ann. § 16-3-20(C) (2000 Cum. Supp.). Only if the jury finds an aggravating circumstance does it decide on the sentence. Ibid. And when it makes that decision, as was the case in Simmons, only two sentences are legally available under South Carolina law: death or life without the possibility of parole. Ibid.

The South Carolina Supreme Court was no doubt correct to this extent: At the time the trial judge instructed the jury in Shafer's case, it was indeed possible that Shafer would receive a sentence other than death or life without the possibility of parole. That is so because South Carolina, in line with other States, gives capital juries, at the penalty phase, discrete and sequential functions. Initially, capital juries serve as factfinders in determining whether an alleged aggravating circumstance exists. Once that factual threshold is passed, the jurors exercise discretion in determining the punishment that ought to be imposed. The trial judge in Shafer's case recognized the critical difference in the two functions. He charged    that "[a] statutory aggravating circumstance is a fact, an incident, a detail or an occurrence," the existence of which must be found beyond a reasonable doubt. App. 203. Turning to the sentencing choice, he referred to considerations of "fairness and mercy," and the defendant's "moral culpability." App. 204. He also instructed     that the jury was free to decide "whether . . . for any reason or no reason at all Mr. Shafer should be sentenced to life imprisonment rather than to death." App. 203.

In sum, when the jury determines the existence of a statutory aggravator, a tightly circumscribed factual inquiry, none of Simmons' due process     concerns arise. There are no "misunderstandings" to avoid, no "false choices" to guard against. See Simmons, 512 U.S. at 161     (plurality opinion). The jury, as aggravating circumstance factfinder, exercises no sentencing discretion itself. If no aggravator is found, the judge takes over and has sole authority to impose the mandatory minimum so heavily relied upon by the South Carolina Supreme Court. See supra, at 8-9, 12. It is only when the jury endeavors the moral judgment whether to impose the death penalty that parole eligibility    may become critical. Correspondingly, it is only at that stage that Simmons comes into play, a stage at which South Carolina law provides no third choice, no 30-year mandatory minimum, just death or life without parole. See Ramdass, 530 U.S. at 169 (Simmons applies where "as a legal matter, there is no possibility of parole if the jury decides the appropriate sentence is life in prison." (emphasis added)). 5Link to the text of the note We therefore hold that HN6 whenever future dangerousness is at issue in a capital sentencing proceeding under South Carolina's new scheme, due process requires that the jury be informed that a life sentence carries no possibility of parole.

        III

LEdHN   South Carolina offers two other grounds in support of the trial judge's refusal to give Shafer's requested parole ineligibility instruction. First, the State argues that the jury was properly informed of the law on parole ineligibility by the trial court's instructions and by defense counsel's own argument. Second, the State contends that no parole ineligibility instruction was required under Simmons because the State never argued Shafer would pose a future danger to society. We now turn to those arguments.

A

"Even if this Court finds Simmons was triggered," the State urges, "the defense's closing argument and the judge's charge fulfilled the requirements of Simmons." Brief for Respondent 38. To support that contention, the State sets out defense counsel's closing pleas that, if Shafer's life is spared, he will "die in prison" after "spending his natural life there." Id. at 39. Next, the State recites passages from the trial judge's instructions reiterating that "life imprisonment means until the death of the defendant." Id. at 40.

The South Carolina Supreme Court, we note, never suggested that counsel's arguments or the trial judge's instructions    satisfied Simmons. That court simply held Simmons inapplicable under the State's new sentencing scheme. 340 S.C. at 298, 531 S.E.2d at 528. We do not find the State's position persuasive. Displacement of "the longstanding     practice of parole availability" remains a relatively recent development, and "common sense tells us that many jurors might not know whether a life sentence carries with it the possibility of parole." Simmons, 512 U.S. at 177-178 (O'CONNOR, J.). South Carolina's situation is illustrative. Until two years before Shafer's trial, as we earlier noted, the State's law did not categorically preclude parole for capital     defendants sentenced to life imprisonment. See supra, at 8-9, n. 3, and 10-11.

Most plainly contradicting the State's contention, Shafer's jury left no doubt about its failure to gain from defense counsel's closing argument or the judge's instructions any clear understanding of what     a life sentence means. The jurors sought further instruction, asking: "Is there any remote chance for someone convicted of murder to become eligible for parole?" App. 253; cf. Simmons, 512 U.S. at 178 (O'CONNOR,     J.) ("that the jury in this case felt compelled to ask whether parole was available shows that the jurors did not know whether or not a life-sentenced defendant will be released from prison"). 6Link to the text of the note

The jury's comprehension was hardly aided by the court's final instruction: "Parole eligibility or ineligibility is not for your consideration." App. 240. That instruction did nothing to ensure that the jury was not misled and may well have been taken to mean "that parole was available but that the jury, for some unstated reason, should be blind to    this fact." Simmons, 512 U.S. at 170 (plurality opinion); see 340 S.C. at 310, 531 S.E.2d at 534 (Finney, C. J., dissenting) ("The jury's inquiry prompted a misleading response which suggested parole was a possibility."); State v. Kelly, 343 S.C. 350, 540 S.E.2d 851, 2001 WL 21321, *13 (S. C., 2001) (Pleicones, J., dissenting in part, concurring in part) ("Without the knowledge that, if aggravators are found, a life sentence is not subject to being reduced by parole, or any other method of early release, the jury is likely to speculate unnecessarily on the possibility of early release, and impose a sentence of death     based upon 'fear rather than reason.'" (quoting Yarbrough v. Commonwealth, 258 Va. 347, 369, 519 S.E.2d 602, 613 (1999))).

In sum, a life sentence for Shafer would permit no "parole, community supervision, . . . early release program, . . . or any other credits that would reduce the mandatory imprisonment," S. C. Code Ann. § 16-3-20(A) (2000 Cum. Supp.) (set out supra, at 4, n. 1); this reality was not conveyed to Shafer's jury by the court's instructions or by the arguments defense counsel was allowed    to make.

B

LEdHN[3] [3]Ultimately, the State maintains that "the prosecution did not argue future dangerousness," so the predicate for a Simmons charge is not present here. Brief for Respondent     42. That issue is not ripe for our resolution.

In the trial court, the prosecutor and defense counsel differed on what it takes to place future dangerousness "at issue." The prosecutor suggested that the State must formally argue future dangerousness. App. 161. Defense counsel urged that once the prosecutor introduces evidence showing future dangerousness, the State cannot avoid a Simmons charge by saying the point was not argued or calling the evidence by another name. See App. 161-162.

As earlier recounted, the trial judge determined that future dangerousness was not at issue, but acknowledged, at one point, that the prosecutor had come close to crossing the line. See supra, at 3-4, 5. The South Carolina Supreme Court, in order to rule broadly that Simmons no longer governs capital sentencing in the State, apparently assumed, arguendo, that future dangerousness had been shown at Shafer's sentencing proceeding. See supra, at 8-9; cf. Kelly, 540 S.E.2d 851, 2001 WL 21321,     at *6 (recognizing that future dangerousness is an issue when it is "a logical inference from the evidence" or was "injected into the case through the State's closing argument"). Because the South     Carolina Supreme Court did not home in on the question whether the prosecutor's evidentiary     submissions or closing argument in fact placed Shafer's future dangerousness at issue, we leave that question open for the state court's attention and disposition.

* * *

For the reasons stated, the judgment of the South Carolina Supreme Court is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

It is so ordered.

1Link to the location of the note in the document
HN5 Section 16-3-20(A) reads: "A person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to murder must be punished by death, by imprisonment for life, or by a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment for thirty years. If the State seeks the death penalty and a statutory aggravating circumstance is found beyond a reasonable doubt pursuant to subsections (B) and (C), and a recommendation of death is not made, the trial judge must impose a sentence of life imprisonment. For purposes of this section, 'life imprisonment' means until death of the offender. No person sentenced to life imprisonment pursuant to this section is eligible for parole, community supervision, or any early release program, nor is the person eligible to receive any work credits, education credits, good conduct credits, or any other credits that would reduce the mandatory life imprisonment required by this section. No person sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment for thirty years pursuant to this section is eligible for parole or any early release program, nor is the person eligible to receive any work credits, education credits, good conduct credits, or any other credits that would reduce the mandatory minimum term of imprisonment for thirty years required by this section. . . . When the Governor commutes a sentence of death to life imprisonment under the provisions of Section 14 of Article IV of the Constitution of South Carolina, 1895, the commutee is not eligible for parole, community supervision, or any early release program, nor is the person eligible to receive any work credits, good conduct credits, education credits, or any other credits that would reduce the mandatory imprisonment required by this subsection."

2Link to the location of the note in the document
The judge also sentenced Shafer to consecutive terms of 20 years in prison for the attempted armed robbery and 5 years in prison for the criminal conspiracy. App. 251-252.

3Link to the location of the note in the document
South Carolina's "new" sentencing scheme changed the punishments available for a capital murder conviction that did not result in a death sentence. The capital sentencing law in effect at the time we decided Simmons read: "A person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to murder must be punished by death or by imprisonment for life and is not eligible for parole until the service of twenty years; provided, however, that when the State seeks the death penalty and an aggravating circumstance is specifically found beyond a reasonable doubt . . .,and a recommendation of death is not made, the court must impose a sentence of life imprisonment without eligibility for parole until the service of thirty years." S. C. Code Ann. § 16-3-20(A) (Supp. 1993). What made Simmons parole ineligible was the provision stating: "The board must not grant parole nor is parole authorized to any prisoner serving a sentence for a second or subsequent conviction, following a separate sentencing for a prior conviction, for violent crimes . . . ." § 24-21-640. This latter provision has not been amended; however, it did not apply to Shafer. Here, we consider whether South Carolina's wholesale elimination of parole for capital defendants sentenced to life in prison, see S. C. Code Ann. § 16-3-20 (2000 Cum. Supp.), described supra, at 2-3, requires a Simmons instruction in all South Carolina capital cases in which future dangerousness is "at issue."

4Link to the location of the note in the document
At the time we decided Simmons v. South Carolina, 512 U.S. 154, 129 L. Ed. 2d 133, 114 S. Ct. 2187 (1994), South Carolina was one of only three States -- Pennsylvania and Virginia were the others -- that "had a life-without-parole sentencing alternative to capital punishment for some or all convicted murderers but refused to inform sentencing juries of that fact." 512 U.S. at 168, n. 8. Since Simmons, Virginia has abandoned this practice. Yarbrough v. Commonwealth, 258 Va. 347, 374, 519 S.E.2d 602, 616 (1999) ("We hold that in the penalty-determination phase of a trial where the defendant has been convicted of capital murder, in response to a proffer of a proper instruction from the defendant prior to submitting the issue of penalty-determination to the jury or where the defendant asks for such an instruction following an inquiry from the jury during deliberations, the trial court shall instruct the jury that the words 'imprisonment for life' mean 'imprisonment for life without possibility of parole.'").

5Link to the location of the note in the document
Tellingly, the State acknowledged at oral argument that if future dangerousness was a factor, and the jury first reported finding an aggravator before going on to its sentencing recommendation, a Simmons charge would at that point be required. Tr. of Oral Arg. 32. We see no significant difference between that situation and the one presented here. Nor does JUSTICE THOMAS' dissent in this case plausibly urge any such distinction. See post, at 2-3. If the jurors should be told life means no parole in the hypothesized bifurcated sentencing proceeding, they should be equally well informed in the actual uninterrupted proceeding.

6Link to the location of the note in the document
Animating JUSTICE THOMAS' dissent is the conviction that the limited information defense counsel was allowed to convey and the judge's charge "left no room for speculation by the jury." Post, at 2. The full record scarcely supports, and we do not share, that conviction. Cf. 340 S.C. 291, 310-311, 531 S.E.2d 524, 534 (2000) (Finney, C. J., dissenting) ("the jury's inquiry prompted a misleading response" that did not reveal the "simple truth").
