


122 S.Ct. 2390
Supreme Court of the United States
BE & K CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, Petitioner,
v.
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, et al.
No. 01-518.
|
Argued April 16, 2002.
|
Decided June 24, 2002.
 

Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring.

Although the Court scrupulously avoids deciding the question (which is not presented in this case), I agree with Justice BREYER that the implication of our decision today is that, in a future appropriate case, we will construe the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) in the same way we have already construed the Sherman Act: to prohibit only lawsuits that are both objectively baseless and subjectively intended to abuse process. See Professional Real Estate Investors, Inc. v. Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc., 508 U.S. 49, 60-61, 113 S.Ct. 1920, 123 L.Ed.2d 611 (1993).
 
Choosing to make explicit what is implied, and then disagreeing with that result, Justice BREYER describes a number of differences between the NLRA and the Sherman Act, all of which suggest to him that a complainant enjoys greater First Amendment rights to file a lawsuit in the face of the latter than the former. Post, at 2404-2406 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Missing from his list, however, is the most important difference of all, which suggests-indeed, demands-precisely the oppositeconclusion. *538 Under the Sherman Act, the entity making the factual determination whether the objectively reasonable suit was brought with an unlawful motive would **2403 have been an Article III court; even with that protection, we thought the right of access to Article III courts too much imperiled. Under the NLRA, however, the entity making the factual finding that determines whether a litigant will be punished for filing an objectively reasonable lawsuit will be an executive agency, the National Labor Relations Board. That this difference undermines Justice BREYER’s analysis, there can be no doubt. At the very least, it poses a difficult question under the First Amendment: whether an executive agency can be given the power to punish a reasonably based suit filed in an Article III court whenever it concludes-insulated from de novo judicial review by the substantial-evidence standard of 29 U.S.C. §§ 160(e), (f)-that the complainant had one motive rather than another. This makes resort to the courts a risky venture, dependent upon the findings of a body that does not have the independence prescribed for Article III courts. It would be extraordinary to interpret a statute which is silent on this subject to intrude upon the courts’ ability to decide for themselves which postulants for their assistance should be punished.
 
For this reason, I am able, unlike Justice BREYER, to join the Court’s opinion in full-including its carefully circumscribed statement that “nothing in our holding today should be read to question the validity of common litigation sanctions imposed by courts themselves,” ante, at 2402 (emphasis added).
 


1
The other cases cited by the majority in which we have afforded significant weight to historical practice, ante, at 2560, are consistent with the principles described above. Nearly all involved venerable and unchallenged practices, and constitutional provisions that were either deeply ambiguous or plainly supportive of the practice. See Dames & Moore v. Regan, 453 U.S. 654, 679–681, and n. 8, 686, 101 S.Ct. 2972, 69 L.Ed.2d 918 (1981) (citing Presidential practice dating from 1799 and never questioned by Congress to inform meaning of “Executive Power”); Ex parte Grossman, 267 U.S. 87, 118–119, 45 S.Ct. 332, 69 L.Ed. 527 (1925) (citing unchallenged Presidential practice dating from 1841 as support for a construction of the pardon power based on the “common law,” the “history of the clause in the Convention,” and “the ordinary meaning of its words”); United States v. Midwest Oil Co., 236 U.S. 459, 469–471, 474, 35 S.Ct. 309, 59 L.Ed. 673 (1915) (citing Presidential practice dating from “an early period in the history of the government,” “uniformly and repeatedly acquiesced in” by Congress and previously upheld by this Court, to establish “a recognized administrative power of the Executive in the management of the public lands”); McPherson v. Blacker, 146 U.S. 1, 25–35, 13 S.Ct. 3, 36 L.Ed. 869 (1892) (citing method of choosing Presidential electors prevalent among the States “from the formation of the government until now,” as to the constitutionality of which “ ‘no question ha[d] ever arisen,’ ” in support of construction consistent with the constitutional text and its drafting history); McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 401–402, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819) (citing power “exercised by the first Congress elected under the present constitution,” “recognized by many successive legislatures, and ... acted upon by the judicial department,” in support of the conclusion that the Necessary and Proper Clause allowed Congress to incorporate a bank); Stuart v. Laird, 1 Cranch 299, 309, 2 L.Ed. 115 (1803) (citing practice that “commence[d] with the organization of the judicial system” in rejecting challenge to Supreme Court Justices' riding circuit). Even Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989), which concluded that the constitutional text did not prohibit judges from undertaking extrajudicial duties and found “additional evidence” for that conclusion in a longstanding practice that it acknowledged had been “controversial,” emphasized that it was relying on “contemporaneous practice by the Founders themselves” that had been “frequent and continuing” since ratification. Id., at 397–400, 109 S.Ct. 647.
2
The majority claims that “the phrase ‘the recess' was used to refer to intra-session recesses at the time of the founding,” ante, at 2561, but it offers strikingly little support for that assertion. It first cites a letter from George Washington that is quite obviously an example of imprecise, colloquial usage. See 3 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 76 (M. Farrand rev. 1966) (“I had put my carriage in the hands of a workman to be repaired and had not the means of mooving [sic] during the recess”). It next cites an example from the New Jersey Legislature that simply reflects that body's practice of dividing its time not only into “sessions” but also into distinct, formal “sittings” within each session, with “the recess” denoting the period between sittings. See Brief for Respondent Noel Canning 23; see also Natelson 207. Finally, the majority cites three pages from the Solicitor General's brief without acknowledging the arguments offered in response to the Solicitor General's few supposed counterexamples. See, e.g., Brief for Respondent Noel Canning 21–24; Natelson 222, n. 120.
3
The majority insists that “the most likely reason the Framers did not place a textual floor underneath the word ‘recess' is that they did not foresee the need for one” because they did not anticipate that intra-session breaks “would become lengthier and more significant than inter-session ones.” Ante, at 2566. The majority's logic escapes me. The Framers' supposed failure to anticipate “length[y]” intra-session breaks might explain why (as I maintain) they did not bother to authorize recess appointments during intra-session breaks at all; but it cannot explain why (as the majority holds) they would have enacted a text that authorizes appointments during all intra-session breaks—even the short ones the majority says they did anticipate—without placing a temporal limitation on that power.
4
The majority erroneously suggests that the “lack of a textual floor raises a problem that plagues” both interpretations of “the Recess.” Ante, at 2566. Not so. If the Clause is given its plain meaning, the President cannot make recess appointments during the session but can make recess appointments during any break between sessions, no matter how short. Contra the majority, that is not a “problem.” True, the recess-appointment power applies even during very short inter-session breaks. But inter-session breaks typically occur at most a few times a year, and the recess-appointment power is of limited utility during very short inter-session breaks since, as explained below, the President can fill only those vacancies that arise during the break. See Part III, infra. Of course, as the Senate Judiciary Committee has argued, the break must be actual and not “constructive”; the Senate must adjourn for some measurable period of time between the two sessions. See infra, at 2602 – 2603. But the requirement that there actually be a recess does not involve anywhere near the level of indeterminacy entailed by the majority's requirement that the recess be long enough (or the circumstances unusual enough), as determined by a court, to trigger the recess-appointment power.
5
The majority does not contend otherwise. The Solicitor General claims that President Lincoln appointed a handful of brigadier generals during intra-session breaks in 1862 and 1863, but he does not include those appointments in his list of known intra-session recess appointments. Compare Brief for Petitioner 22 with App. to Brief for Petitioner 1a. Noel Canning convincingly argues that the generals were not given recess appointments but only unofficial “acting appointments” for which they received no commissions. Brief for Respondent Noel Canning 25; see Rappaport, Why Nonoriginalism Does Not Justify Departing from the Original Meaning of the Recess Appointments Clause (manuscript, at 27, n. 79) (hereinafter Rappaport, Nonoriginalism), online at http://papers.ssrn. com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2374563 (all Internet materials as visited June 24, 2014, and available in the Clerk of Court's case file).
6
The majority dismisses Knox's opinion as overly formalistic because it “relied heavily upon the use of the word ‘the’ ” in the phrase “the Recess.” Ante, at 2563. It did not. As the passage quoted above makes clear, Knox was relying on the common understanding of what “the Recess” meant in the context of marking out legislative time.
7
I say Daugherty “arguably” embraced the majority's view because he may have been endorsing, not the majority's position, but the intermediate view that reads both “the Recess” and “the next Session” in functional terms, so that intra-session appointments would last only until the next intra-session break. See supra, at 2597; Rappaport, Nonoriginalism 34–35.
8
Despite initially admitting that the text “does not naturally favor” its interpretation, the majority halfheartedly suggests that the “ ‘happen to be’ ” reading may be admissible when the subject, like “vacancy,” denotes a “continuing state.” Ante, at 2567 – 2568. That suggestion distorts ordinary English usage. It is indeed natural to say that an ongoing activity or event, like a war, a parade, or a financial crisis, is “happening” for as long as it continues. But the same is not true when the subject is a settled state of affairs, like death, marriage, or vacancy, all of which “happen” when they come into being.
9
The majority insists that “character and politics” will ordinarily prevent the President from circumventing the Senate, and that the Senate has “political resources” to respond to attempts at circumvention. Ante, at 2569. Neither character nor politics prevented Theodore Roosevelt from proclaiming a fictitious recess lasting an “infinitesimal fraction of a second.” In any event, the Constitution does not entrust the Senate's role in the appointments process to the vagaries of character and politics. See, e.g., Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U.S. 868, 879–880, 111 S.Ct. 2631, 115 L.Ed.2d 764 (1991).
10
The majority does not deny that Lee took those positions, but it claims he also “later informed [Thomas] Jefferson that, in the Adams administration, ‘whenever an office became vacant, so short a time before Congress rose, as not to give an opportunity of enquiring for a proper character, they let it lie always till recess.’ ” Ante, at 2570 (quoting Letter from Jefferson to Wilson Cary Nicholas (Jan. 26, 1802), in 36 Papers of Thomas Jefferson 433 (B. Oberg ed. 2009) (hereinafter 1802 Jefferson Letter)). Assuming Lee in fact made the statement attributed to him by Jefferson, and further assuming that Lee endorsed the constitutionality of the practice described in that statement (which Jefferson does not say), that practice could only have been regarded as a pragmatic exception to the general view of the Clause that Lee, like Randolph, espoused. And the practice must not have been extensive, since the Solicitor General has been unable to identify even a single appointment made by Adams that filled a pre-recess vacancy. See infra, at 2610 – 2611.
11
The majority suggests that these statutes may have reflected, not a belief that the recess-appointment power was limited to vacancies arising during the recess, but a “separate” belief that the power could not be used for “new offices” created by Congress and not previously filled. Ante, at 2572. But the latter view (which the majority does not endorse) was inseparably linked with the former (which the majority rejects), as is made clear by the very source the majority cites. See Letter from Alexander Hamilton to James McHenry (May 3, 1799), in 23 Papers of Alexander Hamilton 94 (H. Syrett ed. 1976) (“[T]he power to fill the vacancy is not the power to make an original appointment. The phrase ‘Which may have happened’ serves to confirm this construction.... [I]ndependent of the authority of a special law, the President cannot fill a vacancy which happens during a session of the Senate”); see also 2 Op. Atty. Gen., at 334 (“If the vacancy exist during the session of the Senate, as in the first creation of an office by law, it has been held that the President cannot appoint during the recess, unless he is specially authorized so to do by law”); W. Rawle, A View of the Constitution of the United States of America 163 (2d ed. 1829) (reprint 2009) (“It has been held by [the Senate], that if new offices are created by congress, the president cannot, after the adjournment of the senate, make appointments to fill them. The vacancies do not happen during the recess of the senate”).
12
See also Letter from Adams to James McHenry (April 16, 1799), in 8 Works of John Adams 632 (C. Adams ed. 1853) (proposing the appointments); Letter from Adams to McHenry (May 16, 1799), in id., at 647 (agreeing to “suspend [the appointments] for the present, perhaps till the meeting of the Senate”). Before advising Adams, McHenry also consulted Alexander Hamilton, who agreed that the appointments would be unlawful. See Letter from McHenry to Hamilton (Apr. 26, 1799), in 23 Papers of Alexander Hamilton, at 69, 70 (“It would seem that, under this Constitutional power, the President cannot alone ... fill up vacancies that may happen during a session of the senate”); Letter from Hamilton to McHenry (May 3, 1799), in id., at 94 (“It is clear, that independent of the authority of a special law, the President cannot fill a vacancy which happens during a session of the Senate”).
13
All the letters cited in this paragraph are available online courtesy of the Library of Congress. See James Madison Papers, http:// memory.loc.gov/ammem/collections/madison_papers.
14
The same can be said of the Solicitor General's claim to have found two recess appointments by Washington and four by Jefferson that filled pre-existing vacancies. Noel Canning disputes that claim, pointing out that Washington told the Senate the offices in question had “ ‘fallen vacant during the recess' ” and arguing that Jefferson may have removed the incumbent officers during the recess. Brief for Respondent Noel Canning 44. Suffice it to say that if either Washington or Jefferson had adopted the broader reading, against the written advice of Attorneys General Randolph and Lee, one would expect a good deal more evidence of that fact.
15
A year later Mason, like Taney and Legaré before him, concluded that when a recess appointment expired at the end of the Senate's session, the President could fill the resulting vacancy during the ensuing recess. In reaching that conclusion, Mason reiterated that the recess-appointment power “depends on the happening of vacancies when the Senate is not in session” and said the vacancy at issue was “within the meaning of” the Clause because the happening of the vacancy and the termination of the session had “occurred eo instanti.” 4 Op. Atty. Gen. 523, 526–527 (1846).
16
In the early 20th century, some Senators acceded to the majority's reading of the Clause, as the majority is eager to point out, ante, at 2572. In 1904, Senator Tillman allowed that “the Senate ha[d] acquiesced” in the President's use of the recess-appointment power to fill pre-existing vacancies, 38 Cong. Rec. 1606, though he also quoted at length from the 1863 Judiciary Committee report and said he did “not see how anybody can find any argument to controvert the position [the report] takes,” id., at 1608. And in 1916, Senators Robinson and Sutherland accepted the majority's reading without analysis. 53 Cong. Rec. 4298. The reader can decide whether those statements by three Senators justify the assertion that the Senate “abandoned its hostility” to the broad reading, ante, at 2572.
17
The majority also notes that many of the intra-session recess appointments identified by the Solicitor General were made “within two weeks of the beginning of the recess,” which, according to the majority, “strongly suggests that many of the vacancies initially arose prior to the recess.” Ante, at 2571. The inference is unwarranted, since there are many circumstances other than random chance that could cause a vacancy to arise early in the recess: For example, the prior officeholder may have been another recess appointee whose commission expired at the end of the Senate's session, or he may have waited until the recess to resign so that his successor could be compensated without violating the Pay Act. In any event, the overwhelming majority of the intra-session recess appointments on the Solicitor General's list occurred after 1945 and do not shed light on earlier practices.




