


110 S.Ct. 3157
Supreme Court of the United States
MARYLAND, Petitioner
v.
Sandra Ann CRAIG.
No. 89–478.
|
Argued April 18, 1990.
|
Decided June 27, 1990.

Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice BRENNAN, Justice MARSHALL, and Justice STEVENS join, dissenting.

Seldom has this Court failed so conspicuously to sustain a categorical guarantee of the Constitution against the tide of prevailing current opinion. The Sixth Amendment provides, with unmistakable clarity, that “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to be confronted *861 with the witnesses against him.” The purpose of enshrining this protection in the Constitution was to assure that none of the many policy interests from time to time pursued by statutory law could overcome a defendant’s right to face his or her accusers in court. The Court, however, says:
“We ... conclude today that a State’s interest in the physical and psychological well-being of child abuse victims may be sufficiently important to outweigh, at least in some cases, a defendant’s right to face  **3172 his or her accusers in court. That a significant majority of States have enacted statutes to protect child witnesses from the trauma of giving testimony in child abuse cases attests to the widespread belief in the importance of such a public policy.” Ante, at 3167.
 
Because of this subordination of explicit constitutional text to currently favored public policy, the following scene can be played out in an American courtroom for the first time in two centuries: A father whose young daughter has been given over to the exclusive custody of his estranged wife, or a mother whose young son has been taken into custody by the State’s child welfare department, is sentenced to prison for sexual abuse on the basis of testimony by a child the parent has not seen or spoken to for many months; and the guilty verdict is rendered without giving the parent so much as the opportunity to sit in the presence of the child, and to ask, personally or through counsel, “it is really not true, is it, that I—your father (or mother) whom you see before you—did these terrible things?” Perhaps that is a procedure today’s society desires; perhaps (though I doubt it) it is even a fair procedure; but it is assuredly not a procedure permitted by the Constitution.
 
Because the text of the Sixth Amendment is clear, and because the Constitution is meant to protect against, rather than conform to, current “widespread belief,” I respectfully dissent.
 

*862 I
According to the Court, “we cannot say that [face-to-face] confrontation [with witnesses appearing at trial] is an indispensable element of the Sixth Amendment’s guarantee of the right to confront one’s accusers.” Ante, at 3166. That is rather like saying “we cannot say that being tried before a jury is an indispensable element of the Sixth Amendment’s guarantee of the right to jury trial.” The Court makes the impossible plausible by recharacterizing the Confrontation Clause, so that confrontation (redesignated “face-to-face confrontation”) becomes only one of many “elements of confrontation.” Ante, at 3163–3164. The reasoning is as follows: The Confrontation Clause guarantees not only what it explicitly provides for—“face-to-face” confrontation—but also implied and collateral rights such as cross-examination, oath, and observation of demeanor (TRUE); the purpose of this entire cluster of rights is to ensure the reliability of evidence (TRUE); the Maryland procedure preserves the implied and collateral rights (TRUE), which adequately ensure the reliability of evidence (perhaps TRUE); therefore the Confrontation Clause is not violated by denying what it explicitly provides for—“face-to-face” confrontation (unquestionably FALSE). This reasoning abstracts from the right to its purposes, and then eliminates the right. It is wrong because the Confrontation Clause does not guarantee reliable evidence; it guarantees specific trial procedures that were thought to assure reliable evidence, undeniably among which was “face-to-face” confrontation. Whatever else it may mean in addition, the defendant’s constitutional right “to be confronted with the witnesses against him” means, always and everywhere, at least what it explicitly says: the “ ‘right to meet face to face all those who appear and give evidence at trial.’ ” Coy v. Iowa, 487 U.S. 1012, 1016, 108 S.Ct. 2798, 2800, 101 L.Ed.2d 857 (1988), quoting California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 175, 90 S.Ct. 1930, 1943–44, 26 L.Ed.2d 489 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring).
 
*863 The Court supports its antitextual conclusion by cobbling together scraps of dicta from various cases that have no bearing here. It will suffice to discuss one of them, since they are all of a kind: Quoting Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 63, 100 S.Ct. 2531, 2537, 65 L.Ed.2d 597 (1980), the Court says that “[i]n sum, our precedents establish that ‘the Confrontation Clause reflects a preference for face-to-face confrontation at trial,’ ” ante, at 3165. (emphasis added by the Court). But Roberts, and all the other “precedents” the Court enlists to prove the implausible, **3173 dealt with the implications of the Confrontation Clause, and not its literal, unavoidable text. When Roberts said that the Clause merely “reflects a preference for face-to-face confrontation at trial,” what it had in mind as the nonpreferred alternative was not (as the Court implies) the appearance of a witness at trial without confronting the defendant. That has been, until today, not merely “nonpreferred” but utterly unheard-of. What Roberts had in mind was the receipt of other-than-first-hand testimony from witnesses at trial—that is, witnesses’ recounting of hearsay statements by absent parties who, since they did not appear at trial, did not have to endure face-to-face confrontation. Rejecting that, I agree, was merely giving effect to an evident constitutional preference; there are, after all, many exceptions to the Confrontation Clause’s hearsay rule. But that the defendant should be confronted by the witnesses who appear at trial is not a preference “reflected” by the Confrontation Clause; it is a constitutional right unqualifiedly guaranteed.
 
The Court claims that its interpretation of the Confrontation Clause “is consistent with our cases holding that other Sixth Amendment rights must also be interpreted in the context of the necessities of trial and the adversary process.” Ante, at 3166. I disagree. It is true enough that the “necessities of trial and the adversary process” limit the manner in which Sixth Amendment rights may be exercised, and limit the scope of Sixth Amendment guarantees to the extent that scope is textually indeterminate. Thus (to *864 describe the cases the Court cites): The right to confront is not the right to confront in a manner that disrupts the trial. Illinois v. Allen, 397 U.S. 337, 90 S.Ct. 1057, 25 L.Ed.2d 353 (1970). The right “to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses” is not the right to call witnesses in a manner that violates fair and orderly procedures. Taylor v. Illinois, 484 U.S. 400, 108 S.Ct. 646, 98 L.Ed.2d 798 (1988). The scope of the right “to have the assistance of counsel” does not include consultation with counsel at all times during the trial. Perry v. Leeke, 488 U.S. 272, 109 S.Ct. 594, 102 L.Ed.2d 624 (1989). The scope of the right to cross-examine does not include access to the State’s investigative files. Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 107 S.Ct. 989, 94 L.Ed.2d 40 (1987). But we are not talking here about denying expansive scope to a Sixth Amendment provision whose scope for the purpose at issue is textually unclear; “to confront” plainly means to encounter face-to-face, whatever else it may mean in addition. And we are not talking about the manner of arranging that face-to-face encounter, but about whether it shall occur at all. The “necessities of trial and the adversary process” are irrelevant here, since they cannot alter the constitutional text.
 

II
Much of the Court’s opinion consists of applying to this case the mode of analysis we have used in the admission of hearsay evidence. The Sixth Amendment does not literally contain a prohibition upon such evidence, since it guarantees the defendant only the right to confront “the witnesses against him.” As applied in the Sixth Amendment’s context of a prosecution, the noun “witness”—in 1791 as today—could mean either (a) one “who knows or sees any thing; one personally present” or (b) “one who gives testimony” or who “testifies,” i.e., “[i]n judicial proceedings, [one who] make[s] a solemn declaration under oath, for the purpose of establishing or making proof of some fact to a court.” 2 N. Webster, An American Dictionary of the English Language (1828) (emphasis added). See also J. Buchanan, Linguae Britannicae Vera Pronunciatio (1757). The former meaning (one “who *865 knows or sees”) would cover hearsay evidence, but is excluded in the Sixth Amendment by the words following the noun: “witnesses against him.” The phrase obviously refers to those who give testimony against the defendant at trial. We have nonetheless found implicit in the Confrontation **3174 Clause some limitation upon hearsay evidence, since otherwise the government could subvert the confrontation right by putting on witnesses who know nothing except what an absent declarant said. And in determining the scope of that implicit limitation, we have focused upon whether the reliability of the hearsay statements (which are not expressly excluded by the Confrontation Clause) “is otherwise assured.” Ante, at 3166. The same test cannot be applied, however, to permit what is explicitly forbidden by the constitutional text; there is simply no room for interpretation with regard to “the irreducible literal meaning of the Clause.” Coy, supra, 487 U.S., at 1020–1021, 108 S.Ct., at 2803.
 
Some of the Court’s analysis seems to suggest that the children’s testimony here was itself hearsay of the sort permissible under our Confrontation Clause cases. See ante, at 3166–3167. That cannot be. Our Confrontation Clause conditions for the admission of hearsay have long included a “general requirement of unavailability” of the declarant. Idaho v. Wright, 497 U.S. 805, 815, 110 S.Ct. 3139, 3146, 111 L.Ed.2d 638. “In the usual case ..., the prosecution must either produce, or demonstrate the unavailability of, the declarant whose statement it wishes to use against the defendant.” Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S., at 65, 100 S.Ct., at 2538. We have permitted a few exceptions to this general rule—e.g., for co-conspirators’ statements, whose effect cannot be replicated by live testimony because they “derive [their] significance from the circumstances in which [they were] made,” United States v. Inadi, 475 U.S. 387, 395, 106 S.Ct. 1121, 1126, 89 L.Ed.2d 390 (1986). “Live” closed-circuit television testimony, however—if it can be called hearsay at all—is surely an example of hearsay as “a weaker substitute for live testimony,” id., at 394, 106 S.Ct., at 1126, which can be employed only when the genuine article is unavailable. “When *866 two versions of the same evidence are available, longstanding principles of the law of hearsay, applicable as well to Confrontation Clause analysis, favor the better evidence.” Ibid. See also Roberts, supra (requiring unavailability as precondition for admission of prior testimony); Barber v. Page, 390 U.S. 719, 88 S.Ct. 1318, 20 L.Ed.2d 255 (1968) (same).
 
The Court’s test today requires unavailability only in the sense that the child is unable to testify in the presence of the defendant.1 That cannot possibly be the relevant sense. If unconfronted testimony is admissible hearsay when the witness is unable to confront the defendant, then presumably there are other categories of admissible hearsay consisting of unsworn testimony when the witness is unable to risk perjury, un-cross-examined testimony when the witness is unable to undergo hostile questioning, etc. California v. Green, 399 U.S. 149, 90 S.Ct. 1930, 26 L.Ed.2d 489 (1970), is not precedent for such a silly system. That case held that the Confrontation Clause does not bar admission of prior testimony when the declarant is sworn as a witness but refuses to answer. But in Green, as in most cases of refusal, we could not know why the declarant refused to testify. Here, by contrast, we know that it is precisely because the child is unwilling to testify in the presence of the defendant. That unwillingness cannot be a valid excuse under the Confrontation Clause, whose very object is to place the witness under the sometimes hostile glare of the defendant. “That face-to-face presence may, unfortunately, upset the truthful rape victim or abused child; but by the same token it may confound and undo the false accuser, or reveal the child coached by a malevolent adult.” *867 Coy, 487 U.S., at 1020, 108 S.Ct., at 2802. To say **3175 that a defendant loses his right to confront a witness when that would cause the witness not to testify is rather like saying that the defendant loses his right to counsel when counsel would save him, or his right to subpoena witnesses when they would exculpate him, or his right not to give testimony against himself when that would prove him guilty.
 

III
The Court characterizes the State’s interest which “outweigh[s]” the explicit text of the Constitution as an “interest in the physical and psychological well-being of child abuse victims,” ante, at 3167, an “interest in protecting” such victims “from the emotional trauma of testifying,” ante, at 3169. That is not so. A child who meets the Maryland statute’s requirement of suffering such “serious emotional distress” from confrontation that he “cannot reasonably communicate” would seem entirely safe. Why would a prosecutor want to call a witness who cannot reasonably communicate? And if he did, it would be the State’s own fault. Protection of the child’s interest—as far as the Confrontation Clause is concerned2—is entirely within Maryland’s control. The State’s interest here is in fact no more and no less than what the State’s interest always is when it seeks to get a class of evidence admitted in criminal proceedings: more convictions of guilty defendants. That is not an unworthy interest, but it should not be dressed up as a humanitarian one.
 
And the interest on the other side is also what it usually is when the State seeks to get a new class of evidence admitted: fewer convictions of innocent defendants—specifically, in the *868 present context, innocent defendants accused of particularly heinous crimes. The “special” reasons that exist for suspending one of the usual guarantees of reliability in the case of children’s testimony are perhaps matched by “special” reasons for being particularly insistent upon it in the case of children’s testimony. Some studies show that children are substantially more vulnerable to suggestion than adults, and often unable to separate recollected fantasy (or suggestion) from reality. See Lindsay & Johnson, Reality Monitoring and Suggestibility: Children’s Ability to Discriminate Among Memories From Different Sources, in Children’s Eyewitness Memory 92 (S. Ceci, M. Toglia, & D. Ross eds. 1987); Feher, The Alleged Molestation Victim, The Rules of Evidence, and the Constitution: Should Children Really Be Seen and Not Heard?, 14 Am.J.Crim.L. 227, 230–233 (1987); Christiansen, The Testimony of Child Witnesses: Fact, Fantasy, and the Influence of Pretrial Interviews, 62 Wash.L.Rev. 705, 708–711 (1987). The injustice their erroneous testimony can produce is evidenced by the tragic Scott County investigations of 1983–1984, which disrupted the lives of many (as far as we know) innocent people in the small town of Jordan, Minnesota. At one stage those investigations were pursuing allegations by at least eight children of multiple murders, but the prosecutions actually initiated charged only sexual abuse. Specifically, 24 adults were charged with molesting 37 children. In the course of the investigations, 25 children were placed in foster homes. Of the 24 indicted defendants, one pleaded guilty, two were acquitted at trial, and the charges against the remaining 21 were voluntarily dismissed. See Feher, supra, at 239–240. There is no doubt that some sexual abuse took place in Jordan; but there is no reason to believe it was as widespread as charged. A report by the Minnesota attorney general’s office, based on inquiries conducted by the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, **3176 concluded that there was an “absence of credible testimony and [a] lack of *869 significant corroboration” to support reinstitution of sex-abuse charges, and “no credible evidence of murders.” H. Humphrey, Report on Scott County Investigation 8, 7 (1985). The report describes an investigation full of well-intentioned techniques employed by the prosecution team, police, child protection workers, and foster parents, that distorted and in some cases even coerced the children’s recollection. Children were interrogated repeatedly, in some cases as many as 50 times, id., at 9; answers were suggested by telling the children what other witnesses had said, id., at 11; and children (even some who did not at first complain of abuse) were separated from their parents for months, id., at 9. The report describes the consequences as follows:
“As children continued to be interviewed the list of accused citizens grew. In a number of cases, it was only after weeks or months of questioning that children would ‘admit’ their parents abused them.
 
. . . . .
“In some instances, over a period of time, the allegations of sexual abuse turned to stories of mutilations, and eventually homicide.” Id., at 10–11.
The value of the confrontation right in guarding against a child’s distorted or coerced recollections is dramatically evident with respect to one of the misguided investigative techniques the report cited: some children were told by their foster parents that reunion with their real parents would be hastened by “admission” of their parents’ abuse. Id., at 9. Is it difficult to imagine how unconvincing such a testimonial admission might be to a jury that witnessed the child’s delight at seeing his parents in the courtroom? Or how devastating it might be if, pursuant to a psychiatric evaluation that “trauma would impair the child’s ability to communicate” in front of his parents, the child were permitted to tell his story to the jury on closed-circuit television?
 
In the last analysis, however, this debate is not an appropriate one. I have no need to defend the value of confrontation, *870 because the Court has no authority to question it. It is not within our charge to speculate that, “where face-to-face confrontation causes significant emotional distress in a child witness,” confrontation might “in fact disserve the Confrontation Clause’s truth-seeking goal.” Ante, at 3169. If so, that is a defect in the Constitution—which should be amended by the procedures provided for such an eventuality, but cannot be corrected by judicial pronouncement that it is archaic, contrary to “widespread belief,” and thus null and void. For good or bad, the Sixth Amendment requires confrontation, and we are not at liberty to ignore it. To quote the document one last time (for it plainly says all that need be said): “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right ... to be confronted with the witnesses against him” (emphasis added).
 
* * *
 
The Court today has applied “interest-balancing” analysis where the text of the Constitution simply does not permit it. We are not free to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of clear and explicit constitutional guarantees, and then to adjust their meaning to comport with our findings. The Court has convincingly proved that the Maryland procedure serves a valid interest, and gives the defendant virtually everything the Confrontation Clause guarantees (everything, that is, except confrontation). I am persuaded, therefore, that the Maryland procedure is virtually constitutional. Since it is not, however, actually constitutional I would affirm the judgment of the Maryland Court of Appeals reversing the judgment of conviction.
 


1
I presume that when the Court says “trauma would impair the child's ability to communicate,” ante, at 3170, it means that trauma would make it impossible for the child to communicate. That is the requirement of the Maryland law at issue here: “serious emotional distress such that the child cannot reasonably communicate.” Md.Cts. & Jud.Proc.Code Ann. § 9–102(a)(1)(ii) (1989). Any implication beyond that would in any event be dictum.
2
A different situation would be presented if the defendant sought to call the child. In that event, the State's refusal to compel the child to appear, or its insistence upon a procedure such as that set forth in the Maryland statute as a condition of its compelling him to do so, would call into question—initially, at least, and perhaps exclusively—the scope of the defendant's Sixth Amendment right “to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor.”


