135 S. Ct. 2173
OHIO, Petitioner v. DARIUS CLARK
Supreme Court of the United States
March 2, 2015, Argued; June 18, 2015, Decided
No. 13-1352

Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, concurring in the judgment.

I agree with the Court’s holding, and with its refusal to decide two questions quite unnecessary to that holding: what effect Ohio’s mandatory-reporting law has in transforming a private party into a state actor for Confrontation Clause purposes, and whether a more permissive Confrontation Clause test—one less likely to hold the statements testimonial—should apply to interrogations by private actors. The statements here would not be testimonial  [*2184]  under the usual test applicable to informal police interrogation.

L. P.’s primary purpose here was certainly not to invoke the coercive machinery of the State against Clark. His age refutes the notion that he is capable of forming such a purpose. At common law, young children were  [**319]  generally considered incompetent to take oaths, and were therefore unavailable as witnesses unless the court determined [***22]  the individual child to be competent. Lyon & LaManga, The History of Children’s Hearsay: From Old Bailey to Post-Davis, 82 Ind. L. J. 1029, 1030-1031 (2007). The inconsistency of L. P.’s answers—making him incompetent to testify here—is hardly unusual for a child of his age. And the circumstances of L. P.’s statements objectively indicate that even if he could, as an abstract matter, form such a purpose, he did not. Nor did the teachers have the primary purpose of establishing facts for later prosecution. Instead, they sought to ensure that they did not deliver an abused child back into imminent harm. Nor did the conversation have the requisite solemnity necessary for testimonial statements. A 3-year-old was asked questions by his teachers at school. That is far from the surroundings adequate to impress upon a declarant the importance of what he is testifying to.

That is all that is necessary to decide the case, and all that today’s judgment holds.

I write separately, however, to protest the Court’s shoveling of fresh dirt upon the Sixth Amendment right of confrontation so recently rescued from the grave in Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 124 S. Ct. 1354, 158 L. Ed. 2d 177 (2004). For several decades before that case, we had been allowing hearsay statements to be admitted against a criminal defendant if they [***23]  bore “‘indicia of reliability.’” Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 66, 100 S. Ct. 2531, 65 L. Ed. 2d 597 (1980). Prosecutors, past and present, love that flabby test. Crawford sought to bring our application of the Confrontation Clause back to its original meaning, which was to exclude unconfronted statements made by witnesses—i.e., statements that were testimonial. 541 U.S., at 51, 124 S. Ct. 1354, 158 L. Ed. 2d 177. We defined testimony as a “‘solemn declaration or affirmation made for the purpose of establishing or proving some fact,’” ibid.—in the context of the Confrontation Clause, a fact “potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution,” Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813, 822, 126 S. Ct. 2266, 165 L. Ed. 2d 224 (2006).

Crawford remains the law. But when else has the categorical overruling, the thorough repudiation, of an earlier line of cases been described as nothing more than “adopt[ing] a different approach,” ante, at ___, 192 L. Ed. 2d, at 313—as though Crawford is only a matter of twiddle-dum twiddle-dee preference, and the old, pre-Crawford “approach” remains available? The author unabashedly displays his hostility to Crawford and its progeny, perhaps aggravated by inability to muster the votes to overrule them. Crawford “does not rank on the [author of the opinion’s] top-ten list of favorite precedents—and . . . the [author] could not restrain [himself] from saying (and saying and saying) so.” Harris v. Quinn, 573 U.S. ___, ___, 134 S. Ct. 2618, 189 L. Ed. 2d 620 (2014) (Kagan, J., dissenting).

But snide detractions do [***24]  no harm; they are just indications of motive. Dicta on legal points, however, can do harm, because though they are not binding they can mislead. Take, for example, the opinion’s statement that the primary-purpose test is merely one of several heretofore unmentioned conditions (“necessary, but not always sufficient”) that must be satisfied before the Clause’s protections apply. Ante, at ___, 192 L. Ed. 2d, at  [**320]  315. That is absolutely  [*2185]  false, and has no support in our opinions. The Confrontation Clause categorically entitles a defendant to be confronted with the witnesses against him; and the primary-purpose test sorts out, among the many people who interact with the police informally, who is acting as a witness and who is not. Those who fall into the former category bear testimony, and are therefore acting as “witnesses,” subject to the right of confrontation. There are no other mysterious requirements that the Court declines to name.

The opinion asserts that future defendants, and future Confrontation Clause majorities, must provide “evidence that the adoption of the Confrontation Clause was understood to require the exclusion of evidence that was regularly admitted in criminal cases at the time of the founding.” Ante, at ___, 192 L. Ed. 2d, at 317. This dictum gets the burden precisely backwards—which [***25]  is of course precisely the idea. Defendants may invoke their Confrontation Clause rights once they have established that the state seeks to introduce testimonial evidence against them in a criminal case without unavailability of the witness and a previous opportunity to cross-examine. The burden is upon the prosecutor who seeks to introduce evidence over this bar to prove a long-established practice of introducing specific kinds of evidence, such as dying declarations, see Crawford, supra, at 56, n. 6, 124 S. Ct. 1354, 158 L. Ed. 2d 177, for which cross-examination was not typically necessary. A suspicious mind (or even one that is merely not naïve) might regard this distortion as the first step in an attempt to smuggle longstanding hearsay exceptions back into the Confrontation Clause—in other words, an attempt to return to Ohio v. Roberts.

But the good news is that there are evidently not the votes to return to that halcyon era for prosecutors; and that dicta, even calculated dicta, are nothing but dicta. They are enough, however, combined with the peculiar phenomenon of a Supreme Court opinion’s aggressive hostility to precedent that it purports to be applying, to prevent my joining the writing for the Court. I concur only in the judgment.
