
        
        Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U.S. 157, 106 S. Ct. 988 (1986)
        


      

JUSTICE STEVENS, concurring in the judgment.

 [***150]  Justice Holmes taught us that a word is but the skin of a living thought. A "fact" may also have a life of its own. From the perspective of an appellate judge, after a case has been tried and the evidence has been sifted by another judge, a particular fact may be as clear and certain as a piece of crystal or a small diamond. A trial lawyer, however, must often deal with mixtures of sand and clay. Even a pebble that seems clear enough at first glance may take on a different hue in a handful of gravel.

As we view this case, it appears perfectly clear that respondent intended to commit perjury, that his lawyer knew it, and that the lawyer had a duty -- both to the court and to his client, for perjured testimony can ruin an otherwise meritorious case -- to take [****58]  extreme measures to prevent the perjury from occurring. The lawyer was successful and, from our unanimous and remote perspective, it is now pellucidly clear that the client suffered no "legally cognizable prejudice."

Nevertheless, beneath the surface of this case there are areas of uncertainty that cannot be resolved today. A lawyer's certainty that a change in his client's recollection is a  [*191]  harbinger of intended perjury -- as well as judicial review of such apparent certainty -- should be tempered by the realization that, after reflection, the most honest witness may recall (or sincerely believe he recalls) details that he previously overlooked. Similarly, the post-trial review of a lawyer's pretrial threat to expose perjury that had not yet been committed -- and, indeed, may have been prevented by the threat -- is by no means the same as review of the way in which such a threat may actually have been carried out. Thus, one can be convinced -- as I am -- that this lawyer's actions were a proper way to provide his client with effective representation without confronting the much more difficult questions of what a lawyer must, should, or may do after his client has given [****59]  testimony that the lawyer does not believe. The answer to such questions may well be colored by the particular circumstances attending the actual event and its aftermath.

Because JUSTICE BLACKMUN has preserved such questions for another day, and because I do not understand him to imply  [**1007]  any adverse criticism of this lawyer's representation of his client, I join his opinion concurring in the judgment.
